# 2021-05-12

## 10:28

See [Serre's%20uniformity%20conjecture](../Serre's%20uniformity%20conjecture.md).

## 20:46

> Source: Frobenius exact symmetric tensor categories - Pavel Etingof. IAS Geometric/modular representation theory seminar.
  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7L06K7SL5qw>

- Looking at [modular%20representations](modular%20representations) of finite groups.
  - [../irreducible.md](../irreducible.md) representations: hard, but a lot is known.
  - [../indecomposable%20objects%20of%20a%20category.md](../indecomposable%20objects%20of%20a%20category.md) representations: very hard, very little is known.
    Hard

- See [tensor%20ideal](tensor%20ideal), [Krull-Schmidt theorem](Krull-Schmidt%20theorem): decomposition into indecomposables is essentially unique.
- Can take [split%20Grothendieck%20ring](split%20Grothendieck%20ring).

- [Symmetric%20tensor%20category](Symmetric%20tensor%20category) $\cat{C}$:
  - $k\dash$linear, so enriched in $\Vect_{/k}$ for $k= \bar{k}$ (no assumption on characteristic)
    So morphisms are vector spaces and composition is bilinear.
  - [../abelian%20category.md](../abelian%20category.md)
  - [../Artinian%20category.md): objects have finite length and $\dim_K \cat{C}(X, Y](../Artinian%20category.md):%20objects%20have%20finite%20length%20and%20$/dim_K%20/cat{C}(X,%20Y) < \infty$
  - [../Monoidal%20category.md): $(\tensor, \one](../Monoidal%20category.md):%20$(/tensor,%20/one)$ satisfying associativity and the pentagon axiom
  - [../Symmetric%20monoidal%20category.md](../Symmetric%20monoidal%20category.md): a symmetric braiding $X\tensor Y \mapsvia{\tau_{XY}} Y\tensor X$ such that $\tau_{YX} \circ \tau_{XY} = \id$.
  - [../rigid%20category.md](../rigid%20category.md): existence of duals and morphisms $X\to X\dual$ plus rigidity axioms
  - Compatibility of additive/multiplicative structures: implied when $\tensor$ is bilinear on morphisms.
  - $\Endo_{\cat C}(\one) = k$.

- Example: $\Rep_k(G)$ the category of finite-dimensional representations of $G$.
  Take $G=1$ to recover $\Vect_{/k}$.
  - Can replace a group here by an affine [../group%20scheme.md](../group%20scheme.md)

- Such a category is [../fiber%20functor.md](../fiber%20functor.md): a symmetric tensor functor $F: \cat{C} \to \Vect_{/k}$.
  - Preserves tensor structure (hexagon axiom), preserves braiding, is exact. 
  - Implies automatically faithful.
  - Can take forgetful functor from representations to underlying vector space.
  - Called "fiber" because for spaces and local systems, one can take a fiber at a point
  - Deligne-Milne show this is unique.
  - Can define scheme of tensor automorphisms, $G = \ul{\Aut}^\tensor(F) \in \Grp\Sch_{/k}$.
- For an ([additive%20category)) rigid symmetric monoidal category $\cat{C}_{/k}$ with $\Endo_{\cat C}(\one](additive%20category))%20rigid%20symmetric%20monoidal%20category%20$/cat{C}_{/k}$%20with%20$/Endo_{/cat%20C}(/one) = k$,
  for any $f\in \cat{C}(X, X)$ we can define its [../trace%20(monoidal%20categories).md) $\Tr(f) \in \Endo_{\cat{C}}(\one](../trace%20(monoidal%20categories).md)%20$/Tr(f)%20/in%20/Endo_{/cat{C}}(/one)$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	\one && {X\tensor X\dual} && {X\tensor X\dual} && {X\dual \tensor X} && \one
	\arrow["{\coev_X}", from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{f\tensor \id}", from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow["{\tau_{X, X\dual}}", from=1-5, to=1-7]
	\arrow["{\ev_X}", from=1-7, to=1-9]
	\arrow["{\Tr(f)}"', curve={height=30pt}, dashed, from=1-1, to=1-9]
\end{tikzcd}

> [https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNSxbMCwwLCJcXG9uZSJdLFsyLDAsIlhcXHRlbnNvciBYXFxkdWFsIl0sWzQsMCwiWFxcdGVuc29yIFhcXGR1YWwiXSxbNiwwLCJYXFxkdWFsIFxcdGVuc29yIFgiXSxbOCwwLCJcXG9uZSJdLFswLDEsIlxcY29ldl9YIl0sWzEsMiwiZlxcdGVuc29yIFxcaWQiXSxbMiwzLCJcXHRhdV97WCwgWFxcZHVhbH0iXSxbMyw0LCJcXGV2X1giXSxbMCw0LCJcXFRyKGYpIiwyLHsiY3VydmUiOjUsInN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImRhc2hlZCJ9fX1dXQ==](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNSxbMCwwLCJcXG9uZSJdLFsyLDAsIlhcXHRlbnNvciBYXFxkdWFsIl0sWzQsMCwiWFxcdGVuc29yIFhcXGR1YWwiXSxbNiwwLCJYXFxkdWFsIFxcdGVuc29yIFgiXSxbOCwwLCJcXG9uZSJdLFswLDEsIlxcY29ldl9YIl0sWzEsMiwiZlxcdGVuc29yIFxcaWQiXSxbMiwzLCJcXHRhdV97WCwgWFxcZHVhbH0iXSxbMyw0LCJcXGV2X1giXSxbMCw0LCJcXFRyKGYpIiwyLHsiY3VydmUiOjUsInN0eWxlIjp7ImJvZHkiOnsibmFtZSI6ImRhc2hlZCJ9fX1dXQ==)

- Can define a categorical [../dimension%20of%20a%20category.md) $\dim X \in K$ as $\dim X\da \Tr(\id_X](../dimension%20of%20a%20category.md)%20$/dim%20X%20/in%20K$%20as%20$/dim%20X/da%20/Tr(/id_X)$.
- See theory of [semisimplification](semisimplification).
- A morphism $f\in \cat{C}(X, Y)$ is **negligible** if for all $g\in \cat{C}(Y, X)$ we have $\Tr(f\circ g) = 0$.
  - Negligible morphisms form a [tensor%20ideal](tensor%20ideal) of morphisms: stable under composition and tensor product with other morphisms.

- Can form quotient $\bar{\cat{C}} \cat{C} / \cat{N}$: full subcategory where $\bar{\cat{C}}(X, Y) \da \cat{C}(X, Y) / \cat{N}(X, y)$, i.e. form the vector space quotient of the hom sets.
  - Still monoidal.
  - Generally nasty, but if trace of any nilpotent endomorphism in $\cat{C}$ (e.g. when $\cat{C}$ admits a monoidal functor to an abelian STC), then $\bar{\cat{C}}$ is a [../semisimple%20category.md](../semisimple%20category.md) STC, and in particular is abelian and every object is a direct sum of simple objects.
  - True if $\cat{C}$ is abelian: take any nilpotent endomorphism, filter by kernels of powers and take the associated graded.
  	Trace of original equals trace of associated graded, but the latter is zero.
  - Can compute trace *after* pushing through an abelian functor.
  - $\bar{\cat{C}}$ is the [semisimplification](semisimplification) of $\cat{C}$

- [../indecomposable%20objects%20of%20a%20category.md](../indecomposable%20objects%20of%20a%20category.md) in $\cat{C}$ of nonzero dimension.
  - This procedure is forcing [Schur's%20Lemma](Schur's%20Lemma) to be true!

- Run into functors that aren't exact on either side, e.g. the Frobenius.
  - But still additive, and every additive functor on a *semisimple* category is exact.

- Frobenius functors: take $X^{\tensor p}$, allow cyclic permutations $c$ with $c^p = 1$, get [../equivariant.md](../equivariant.md) with respect to $\ZZ/p$.
  - Thus $X^{\tensor p} \in \cat{C} \boxprod \Rep_{/k} \ZZ/p$, the [Deligne%20tensor%20product](Deligne%20tensor%20product).
  - Can take $\id_{\cat C} \boxprod \ss$, i.e. [semisimplification](semisimplification) on the 2nd component, to get an additive monoidal twisted-linear functor $\Fr: \cat{C} \to \cat{C} \boxprod \Ver_p$
    - Here $\Ver_p$ is a *Verlinde category*: just denotes $\bar{\cat C}$ with a modified tensor product formula...?
- Can [../filtration.md) $X^{\tensor p}$ by $\Fr_i \da \ker (1-c](../filtration.md)%20$X^{/tensor%20p}$%20by%20$/Fr_i%20/da%20/ker%20(1-c)^i$. 
