-   [2021-04-30](#section)
    -   [Varieties with prescribed Hodge numbers](#varieties-with-prescribed-hodge-numbers)
    -   [l-adic Representations](#l-adic-representations)














# 2021-04-30

## Varieties with prescribed Hodge numbers

> Reference: Remy van Dobben de Bruyn (Princeton and IAS), "Constructing varieties with prescribed Hodge numbers modulo m in positive characteristic". Stanford AG Seminar.

-   One of Serre's tricks: use group quotients cleverly.

-   There is a way to directly add/subtract/multiply Hodge diamonds.

-   Inverse Hodge problem: when can a Hodge diamond be realized by a smooth projective variety? Very hard problem. Want to use this to get information about $h_{{\mathrm{crys}}}$.

-   Easier question: look at linear/polynomial relations satisfied by all Hodge diamonds of ${\mathsf{Var}_{/k} }({\mathsf{sm}}, \mathop{\mathrm{proj}})$?

-   Main theorems: for a fixed dimension $n$,

    -   Linear relations are spanned by Serre duality in positive characteristic.
    -   In $\operatorname{ch}(k) > 0$, the only polynomial relations are $h^{0,0} = 1$ and Serre Duality.
    -   In $\operatorname{ch}(k) = 0$, one has to add in Hodge symmetry.

-   Important tools:

    -   Kunneth formula for Hodge diamonds: there's a graphical way to do this by summing over several different ways to place blocks in the diamonds.
    -   Blowups: `
        <span class="math display">
        \begin{align*}
        h(\mathop{\mathrm{Bl}}_2 X) 
        &= h(X) - h(z) + h(E) \\
        &= h(X) - h(z) + h(z)(1 + {\mathbb{L}}+ {\mathbb{L}}^2 + \cdots + {\mathbb{L}}^{c-1} )\\
        &= h(z) + ({\mathbb{L}}+ {\mathbb{L}}^2 + \cdots + {\mathbb{L}}^{c-1} )
        \end{align*}
        <span>`{=html} where $z$ is the point removed and $E$ is the exceptional divisor.

## l-adic Representations

-   Too many primes with supersingular reduction implies CM. Primes are supersingular about half of the time.

-   Open image theorems: not known for abelian varieties in general.
