# 2021-05-03

## Representations of Hopf Algebras

See [../Hopf%20algebra.md](../Hopf%20algebra.md)

- Algebras: $m: A^{\tensor 2} \to A$ and $u:k\to A$ the unit with associativity:

\begin{tikzcd}
	{M^{\tensor 3}} && {M^{\tensor 2}} \\
	\\
	{M^{\tensor 2}} && M
	\arrow["m", from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow["m", from=1-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{m\tensor \id_M}", from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{\id_M \tensor m}"', from=1-1, to=3-1]
\end{tikzcd}

> [https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJNXntcXHRlbnNvciAzfSJdLFsyLDAsIk1ee1xcdGVuc29yIDJ9Il0sWzAsMiwiTV57XFx0ZW5zb3IgMn0iXSxbMiwyLCJNIl0sWzIsMywibSJdLFsxLDMsIm0iXSxbMCwxLCJtXFx0ZW5zb3IgXFxvbmUiXSxbMCwyLCJcXG9uZVxcdGVuc29yIG0iLDJdXQ==](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJNXntcXHRlbnNvciAzfSJdLFsyLDAsIk1ee1xcdGVuc29yIDJ9Il0sWzAsMiwiTV57XFx0ZW5zb3IgMn0iXSxbMiwyLCJNIl0sWzIsMywibSJdLFsxLDMsIm0iXSxbMCwxLCJtXFx0ZW5zb3IgXFxvbmUiXSxbMCwyLCJcXG9uZVxcdGVuc29yIG0iLDJdXQ==)


- [Coalgebras](Coalgebras): $\Delta: A\to A^{\tensor 2}$, $\eps: A\to k$ the counit.
  Reverse the arrows in the diagram for coassociativity.
  This yields a bialgebra, for Hopf structure need an antipode $s:M\to M$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	&&& M \\
	\\
	k &&& {M^{\tensor 2}} \\
	\\
	&&& {M^{\tensor 2}}
	\arrow["{s\tensor \id_M}", from=3-4, to=5-4]
	\arrow["u"', from=3-1, to=5-4]
	\arrow["\eps"', from=1-4, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{?}", from=1-4, to=3-4]
\end{tikzcd}


> [https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMywwLCJNIl0sWzMsMiwiTV57XFx0ZW5zb3IgMn0iXSxbMyw0LCJNXntcXHRlbnNvciAyfSJdLFswLDIsImsiXSxbMSwyLCJzXFx0ZW5zb3IgXFxvbmUiXSxbMywyLCJ1IiwyXSxbMCwzLCJcXGVwcyIsMl0sWzAsMSwiPyJdXQ==](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMywwLCJNIl0sWzMsMiwiTV57XFx0ZW5zb3IgMn0iXSxbMyw0LCJNXntcXHRlbnNvciAyfSJdLFswLDIsImsiXSxbMSwyLCJzXFx0ZW5zb3IgXFxvbmUiXSxbMywyLCJ1IiwyXSxbMCwzLCJcXGVwcyIsMl0sWzAsMSwiPyJdXQ==)


Why [../Hopf%20algebra.md](../Hopf%20algebra.md)?
Some natural examples:

- $kG$ the [group%20algebra](../group%20algebra.md).
  - $\Delta(g) \da g^{\tensor 2}$
  - $\eps(g) = 1_G$
  - $s(g) = g\inv$

- $k^G = \Hom_k(kG, k)$ an algebra of functions, forcing distinct group elements to be orthogonal idempotents, take  \( \ts{ P_x \st x\in G } \) with \( P_x P_y = \delta_{xy} P_y \) ??

- Consider category $\modsleft{H}^\fd$ of finite-dimensional [../Representation%20theory.md](../Representation%20theory.md) of $H$.
  - Issue: tensor product of $R\dash$modules may not again be an $R\dash$module.

- Antipode will be invertible when $H$ is finite dimensional

- A lot of structures here: closed under tensors, duals, contains $k$.

- Finite [triangle%20axiom](triangle%20axiom).

  - Evaluation $M\dual \tensor M \to \one$ and coevaulation $\one \to X\tensor X\dual$. 
    - For finite dimensional vector spaces, $k\mapsto \sum k e_i \tensor e_i\dual$?
  - Finite rank: finitely many simples up to iso.
    Can still have infinitely many indecomposables.

- Define $\Ext^n_{\cat C}(X, Y)$ to be equivalence classes of $n\dash$fold extensions, i.e. exact sequences $0 \to Y \to E_n \to \cdots \to E_1 \to X \to 0$, and $H^*(\cat{C}) \da H^*_{\cat C}(\one, \one) = \bigoplus _{n\geq 0} \Ext^n_{\cat C} (\one, \one )$.
  Can similarly replace $\one$ with $X$ to define $H^*(X)$, which will be a module over $H^*(\cat C)$.

- Support varieties: $V_{\cat C}(\one) = \mspec H^*(\cat C)$, $V_{\cat C}(X)$ is a more complicated quotient.

- Representation theory *of categories*: module categories over a category!

- Big question: **tensor product property**.
  Is there an equality
\[
V_{\cat C}(X\tensor Y) \equalsbecause{?} V_{\cat C}(X) \intersect V_{\cat C}(Y)
.\]

- True for cocommutative [quantum%20groups](quantum%20groups).
- Some counterexamples in non-braided monoidal categories.
  Uses a *smash product* of modules
- See [thick%20ideals](thick%20ideals).

## 22:52

> Reference: Clausen, the K-theory of adic spaces. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e_0PTVzViRQ>

- [adic%20spaces](adic%20spaces): formalism for non-Archimedean geometry.
- [Formal%20scheme](Formal%20scheme): e.g. formal thickening of a subvariety.
  	Sometimes want to delete a [../special%20fiber.md](../special%20fiber.md).

- Def ([adic%20ring)](adic%20ring)): complete with respect to a finitely-generated ideal, so $R = \inverselim R/I^n$
  - Yields [../scheme.md](../scheme.md) as a subcategory?

- Some nice features:
  - Topological bases of [quasicompact](quasicompact) open subsets
  - Has a nice ring attached to each subspace.

- Subtleties:
  - Structure sheaf is only a presheaf and not necessarily a sheaf
  - Not even great when it *is* a sheaf: can't work locally

- $\Solid_\ZZ$: abelian bicomplete category.
  Full subcategory of [condensed%20sets](condensed%20sets).
  Has compact projective generators $\prod_I \ZZ$

  - [Compact%20generators](Compact%20generators): mapping out to filtered colimits..?
  - [Projective%20generators](Projective%20generators): lift along surjections
  - [../Generators%20of%20a%20category.md](../Generators%20of%20a%20category.md): everything is a cokernel of direct sums of these

- For morphisms, note $\Hom( \prod_I \ZZ, \ZZ) = \bigoplus_I \ZZ$

- Let $\Perf$ be [../perfect%20complexes.md), why not consider $K(\VectBundle(X))$ or $K(\Perf(X)](../perfect%20complexes.md),%20why%20not%20consider%20$K(/VectBundle(X))$%20or%20$K(/Perf(X))$?
  - Doesn't satisfy [../descent.md](../descent.md)

- Need a good category of [quasicoherent%20sheaves](quasicoherent%20sheaves)

- What is a [presentable%20category](presentable%20category)?

- What is a [Tate%20algebra](Tate%20algebra)?

- What is [Arakelov%20theory](Arakelov%20theory)?
  - Something to do with [arithmetic%20surfaces](arithmetic%20surfaces).
  - Some apparent contributions by Faltings:
    - A [../Riemann-Roch.md](../Riemann-Roch.md) theorem
    - A [Noether%20formula](Noether%20formula)
    - A [Hodge%20index%20theorem](Hodge%20index%20theorem)
    - Non-negativity of the self-intersection of the dualizing sheaf.
  - Vojta 1991: new proof of [Mordell%20conjecture](../Mordell%20conjecture.md)

