-   [2021-04-12](#section)
    -   [Chat with Phil](#chat-with-phil)
    -   [15:23: Topology Talk](#topology-talk)














2021-04-12
==========

Chat with Phil
--------------

-   Some motivation for [[../K3%20Surfaces.md | ../K3%20Surfaces.html]]: Fermat hypersurfaces $\sum x_i ^k$ for some fixed $k$.\
    Look for ${\mathbb{Q}}{\hbox{-}}$points, since by homogeneity the denominators can be scaled out to get ${\mathbb{Z}}{\hbox{-}}$points

-   [rational%20points) is finite, i.e. \$ \> C(`{\mathbb{Q}}`{=tex}](rational%20points)%20is%20finite,%20i.e.%20$/#%20C(/QQ) < \infty$.

    -   Interesting consequence: there are only finitely many counterexamples to Fermat for any fixed $k$. In fact, there are zero, but still.

-   Diagonal hypersurfaces $x_0^k + \cdots + x_n^k = 0$.\
    [[../Calabi-Yau.md) when $k=n+1$ (maybe a bound instead..? | ../Calabi-Yau.html]]%20when%20$k=n+1$%20(maybe%20a%20bound%20instead..?), sharp change in behavior of finiteness of rational points at this threshold.

15:23: Topology Talk
--------------------

-   [Dehn%20Surgery](Dehn%20Surgery): remove a tubular neighborhood of a knot, i.e. a solid torus, glue back in by some diffeomorphism of the boundary.

-   [Heegard-Floer%20homology](Heegard-Floer%20homology), rank of $\operatorname{HF}$ equals cardinality of $H_{\mathrm{sing}}$.

-   Left-orderability on groups: a total order compatible with the group operation. Torsion groups can't be LO: $x>1 \implies 1 = x^n > \cdots > x > 1$.

    -   [[../foliate.md | ../foliate.html]]: a geometric condition. Admits a decomposition into leaves where a simple closed curve intersects each transversally?

-   Fibred 3-manifolds: take $\Sigma \times I$ for $\Sigma$ a surface, glue the top and bottom by some diffeomorphism $\phi: \Sigma: {\circlearrowleft}$.

-   Osvath-Szabo: admitting a taut foliation implies being a non-$L{\hbox{-}}$space. Is the converse true?

-   Interesting [knot%20invariants): \$`\tau`{=tex}, s, g_4(K](knot%20invariants):%20$/tau,%20s,%20g_4(K), \sigma$. Also the Jones, Conway, Alexander polynomials, or even just a coefficient. Note that some of these polynomials can not admit cabling formulas.
