# 2021-06-04

## 15:13

- Problem: for many QFTs, we don't know how to write down the quantum observables $\mcf(U)$ for an open $U \subseteq X$ (e.g. for $X$ spacetime).
- Three approaches:
  - Factorizable cosheaves (topological/differential geometric)
    Quantum observables in the field theory.
  - Vertex algebras (algebra and analysis)
    Infinite dimensional vector spaces, symmetries of $2d$ conformal field theories
  - Chiral/factorization algebras (algebraic geometry)
    $\Qcoh$ sheaves ($D\dash$modules) with Lie (co)algebra structures.
    Collisions between local operators

- Vertex algebra: meromorphic multiplication $V^{\tensor 2} \to V((z))$.
- Vertex operators: $Y(\wait, z): V\to \Endo V\powerseries{z, z\inv}$ where $A\mapsto \sum A_{(n)} z^?$ where $A_{(n)}:V\to V$ should be thought of as ways of multiplying.
- Any commutative algebra with a derivation $T$ yields a vertex algebra $Y(A, z) = e^{zT} A = \sum _{T^k A \over k!} z^k$.
  - Then $A_{(n)}$ is given by multiplication in $V$ of the form ${1\over (n-1)!} T^{-n-1} A$.
- The monster group is the largest sporadic simple group, constructed as the automorphisms of a vertex algebra constructed from the Leech lattice.
- We knew the dimensions of representations before the construction (e.g character tables), conjectured to be related to modular functions, Borcherds Fields in 98 for proving this!
- Important fact: certain categories of representations of affine Lie algebras/quantum groups form **modular tensor categories**: Kazhdan-Lusztig 93!
  Nice invertible objects? Levels are closed under tensor?
  - Special case: for $V$ a rational vertex algebra, its representation category is modular tensor.
- Beilinson-Drinfeld, 90s: factorization/chiral algebras
  - Factorization *spaces*: an assignment of spaces \( \mathcal{Y}_n \to X^{\times n} \) for $X$, Ran's condition on the inclusion $\diagonal: X\to X^{\times 2}$, and factorization isomorphisms, conditions on $\diagonal^c$.
  - For factorization algebras, make the assignment a sheaf.

- Discrete example: particles on a surface labeled with integers, where colliding causes addition of labels.
- Ex: the Hilbert scheme of points.
  Lengths of subschemes equals dimension of quotient of $\spec$ as a vector space over $\CC$.
  Consider $\spec \CC[x, y] / \gens{ x, y(y- \lambda) }$. 
  $\lambda=0$ remembers that the collision happened along the $y$ axis.
- $\Hilb_X$ is smooth when $\dim X = 1,2$.
- Most important example of a factorization space: Beilinson-Drinfeld Grassmannian.
  - For a smooth curve $X$ and $G$ a reductive group, built out of principal $G$ bundles.
  - Parameterizes triples $\vector x\in X^n$, $\sigma$ a principal $G$ bundle, and $\xi$ a trivialization of $\sigma$ in $X\sm \vector x$.
  - Important in geometric Langlands.
- Upshot: combine all 3 approaches to tackle problems!
- Vertex algebras are factorization algebras over curves (with more symmetry)
- A vertex algebra is quasi-conformal if it has a nice action of $\Aut \Spf \CC \powerseries{t}$, automorphisms of a formal disk? 
  (Corresponds to Virasoro symmetry of the CFT).
  - Can get a sheaf out of this which is a chiral algebra over the curve.

- Note: aut of formal disk is more like in ind object in group schemes?
  Not an algebraic group, carries some limits/colimits?
- Direct bridge from factorizable cosheaves to factorizable algebras doesn't quite exist yet!
