-   [2021-03-17](#section)
    -   [17:00](#section-1)














# 2021-03-17

## 17:00

-   What is a [[../local%20field.md | ../local%20field.html]]?
-   What is a [[../Global%20field.md | ../Global%20field.html]]?
    -   Why are these generally more difficult than local fields?
-   What is a field that is not local or global?
-   What is a fibration of varieties?
-   What is a [del%20Pezzo%20surface](del%20Pezzo%20surface)?
-   What is the [[../Jacobian.md | ../Jacobian.html]] of a curve?
-   What is the genus of a curve?
-   What is a [[../torsor.md | ../torsor.html]]?
-   What is a [complete%20intersection](complete%20intersection)?
-   What are some examples of $p{\hbox{-}}$adic fields?
-   What is a [Severi-Brauer%20variety](Severi-Brauer%20variety)?
-   What is [[../Hensel's%20Lemma.md | ../Hensel's%20Lemma.html]]?
-   What is [[quadratic%20reciprocity | ../quadratic%20reciprocity.html]]?
    -   Conics over [[../Global%20field.md | ../Global%20field.html]] fail to have rational points at an even number of places?
-   What is a [[../zettelkasten/ramified%20primes.md | ../zettelkasten/ramified%20primes.html]]/unramified extension?
-   Interpretation of [[../Subjects/Weil%20Conjectures.md | Subjects/Weil%20Conjectures.html]]: has lots of points over big enough extensions?
-   What is the [Hasse%20Principle](Hasse%20Principle)?
-   What are [[../adele.md | ../adele.html]] points?
    -   Product of $K_v$ points!
-   What is the [[../Brauer%20group.md | ../Brauer%20group.html]]?
-   What is a [[../central%20simple%20algebra.md | ../central%20simple%20algebra.html]]?
-   What are the main theorems of [[../Class%20field%20theory.md | ../Class%20field%20theory.html]]?
-   Why is the following SES important? `
    <span class="math display">
    \begin{align*}
    0 \to \mathop{\mathrm{Br}}k \to \oplus_v \mathop{\mathrm{Br}}k_v \to {\mathbb{Q}}/{\mathbb{Z}}\to 0
    .\end{align*}
    <span>`{=html}
-   What is a [model%20of%20a%20variety](model%20of%20a%20variety)?
-   What is a [[../special%20fiber.md | ../special%20fiber.html]]?
