-   [2021-05-05](#section)
    -   [01:42](#section-1)
    -   [16:34](#section-2)














2021-05-05
==========

01:42
-----

-   There is apparently a theory of [algebraic%20cobordism](algebraic%20cobordism).

16:34
-----

\^22ba3a

> Reference: Padmavathi Srinivasan, UGA NT Seminar.

-   If $r$ is the rank and $g$ is the genus for $X$ a nice curve over ${\mathbb{Q}}$ with good reduction at $p$,

    -   Want to find rational points
    -   If $r<g$ (?) then [Chabauty-Coleman](Chabauty-Coleman) applies.
    -   This talk: $r=g$, allows finding a basis for ${\mathbb{Q}}_p$ valued functions on $J({\mathbb{Q}})$.

-   See p-adic [height%20pairing](height%20pairing).

    -   Height pairing has to do with rational points on [[../Jacobian.md | ../Jacobian.html]]?
    -   Trying to compute [canonical%20heights](canonical%20heights)?
    -   See [local%20height](local%20height)
    -   See [Weil%20height%20machine](Weil%20height%20machine)

-   Can compute heights as intersection numbers on regular models.

-   See [Abel-Jacobi%20map](Abel-Jacobi%20map)

-   Try to realize rational points as the zero locus of p-adic analytic functions.

-   Recent work: quadratic Chabauty used to find all rational points on the infamously cursed [[../modular%20curve.md) \$X_S(13 | ../modular%20curve.html]]%20$X_S(13)$.

-   Looking for explanations through [[p-adic%20Hodge%20theory | ../p-adic%20Hodge%20theory.html]].

-   See [[../Mordell-Weil%20rank.md | ../Mordell-Weil%20rank.html]]

-   See [Néron-Severi](Néron-Severi) of the Jacobian

-   Get height functions where local heights $h_p$ can be computed by iterated [Coleman%20integrals](Coleman%20integrals).

-   There is a canonical height machine for abelian varieties.

    -   Need a curvature form in $\Omega^1(X) \otimes H^1_\mathrm{dR}(X)$.
    -   Get one height for each choice of [idele%20class%20character](idele%20class%20character)

-   *Symmetric line bundles*: $\mathcal{L}\cong [1]^* \mathcal{L}$.

-   Zhang defines a **metric** on a [[../line%20bundle.md | ../line%20bundle.html]]: gives a way to measure the size of elements in each fiber.

    -   It's a locally bounded continuous function $\nu: \mathcal{L}^{\times}\coloneqq{ \operatorname{Tot} }( \mathcal{L} ) \setminus\left\{{0}\right\}\to {\mathbb{R}}$ with $\nu( \alpha \mathbf{v}) = v_p(\alpha) + \nu(\mathbf{v})$ for $\alpha\in \mkern 1.5mu\overline{\mkern-1.5mu{\mathbb{Q}}_p\mkern-1.5mu}\mkern 1.5mu^{\times}, \mathbf{v} \in \mathcal{L}^{\times}$.
    -   Here continuous is in the locally analytic topology, since we're over ${\mathbb{Q}}_p$.
    -   Can do all of the usual stuff carrying the additional data of the metric: tensor powers, pullbacks, etc.

-   When you have an integral model: take closures!

    -   Picking integral models allows measuring sizes of sections.

-   See [valuations](valuations), used to define *admissible metrics*.

-   Admissible metrics on ${\mathcal{O}}_X$ factor through the [reduction%20graph](reduction%20graph)

    -   See [semistable%20model](semistable%20model) of a curve $X_{/\QQp}$.

-   Adelic metric: a collection of metrics for almost every [[../place.md | ../place.html]].

    -   Associated height function: for $x\in X({\mathbb{Q}})$, pick a section not vanishing at $x$ and sum all contributions: $x\mapsto \sum_{p \in {\operatorname{Places}}} v_p (s(x))$.

-   Rigidified bundles: remember a point in the fiber.

-   For each place, there is a canonical metric which makes certain isomorphisms isometries in a Banach space

    -   Apply Banach fixed-point theorem to the self-map $A \xrightarrow{[2]} A$.

-   Curvature form $\mathop{\mathrm{Curv}}(\mathcal{L}_v)$ is sent to the first [[../Chern%20class.md) \$c_1(`\mathcal{L}`{=tex}\_v | ../Chern%20class.html]]%20$c_1(/mathcal{L}_v)$ under cup product in de Rham cohomology.

-   To get a canonical metric for all line bundles, it suffices to canonically metrize the [[../Poincare%20bundle.md | ../Poincare%20bundle.html]]. Every line bundle on $A$ is a pullback of it.

-   Any two metrics with the same curvature differ by $\int \omega$ for $\omega$
