# Monday January 13th

## Lengths

Recall that we have a root space decomposition $\lieg = \lieh \oplus \bigoplus_{\beta \in \Phi} \lieg_\beta$ for finite dimensional semisimple lie algebras over $\CC$.
We have $s_\beta(\lambda) = \lambda - (\lambda, \beta\dual)\beta$, for $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$ and the Weyl group 
$$
W = \generators{s_\beta \suchthat \beta\in\Phi} = \generators{s_\alpha \suchthat \alpha \in \Delta}
$$ 
where $\Delta = \theset{a_i}$ are the simple roots.

For $w\in W$, we can take the reduced expression for $w$ by writing $w = s_1 \cdots s_n$ with $s_i$ simple and $n$ minimal.
The length is uniquely determined, but not the expression.
So we define $\ell(w) \definedas n$ where $\ell(1) \definedas 0$.

:::{.fact}
\envlist

1. $\ell(w)$ is the size of the set $\theset{\beta\in\Phi^+ \suchthat w\beta < 0}$
    - The above set is equal to $\Phi^+ \intersect w\inv \Phi^-$.
    - In particular, for $\beta \in \Phi^+$, $\beta$ is simple (i.e. $\beta \ni \Delta$ iff $\ell(s_\beta) = 1)$.
    - Note: $\alpha$ is the only root that $s_\alpha$ sends to a negative root, so $s_\alpha(\beta) > 0$ for all $\beta\in\Phi^+\setminus\theset{\alpha}$.

2. $\ell(w) = \ell(w\inv)$ for all $w\in W$, so $\ell(w)$ is also the size of $\Phi \intersect w\Phi$ (replacing $w\inv$ with $w$)

3. There exists a unique $w_0 \in W$ with $\ell(w_0)$ maximal such that $\ell(w_0) = \abs{\Phi^+}$ and $w_0(\Phi^+) = \Phi^-$.
    - Also $\ell(w_0 w) = \ell(w_0) - \ell(w)$
    [^1]


4. For $\alpha \in \Phi^+$, $w\in W$, we have either 

\[
\ell(w s_\alpha) > \ell (w) \iff w(\alpha) > 0 \\
\ell(w s_\alpha) < \ell (w) \iff w(\alpha) < 0 \\
.\]

Taking inverses yields $\ell(s_\alpha w) > \ell(w) \iff w\inv\alpha > 0$.



[^1]: Note that the product of reduced expressions is not usually reduced, so the length isn't additive.

:::

## Bruhat Order


:::{.definition title="Bruhat Order"}
Let $S$ be the set of simple reflections, i.e. $S = \theset{s_\alpha \suchthat \alpha \in \Delta}$.
Then define 
$$
T \definedas \Union_{w\in W} wSw\inv = \theset{s_\beta \suchthat \beta\in\Phi^+}
.$$
This is the set of *all* reflections in $W$ through hyperplanes in $E$.

We'll write $w' \mapsvia{t} w$ means $w=tw'$ and $\ell(w') < \ell(w)$.
Note that in the literature, it's also often assumed that that $\ell(w') = \ell(w) - 1$.
In this case, we say $w'$ **covers** $w$, and refer to this as **the covering relation**.
So $w' \to w$ means that $w' \mapsvia{t} w$ for some $t\in T$.
We extend this to a partial order: $w' < w$ means that there exists a $w$ such that 
$$
w' = w_0 \to w_1 \to \cdots \to w_n = w.
$$
This is called the **Bruhat-Chevalley order** on $W$.

:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
$w' < w \implies \ell(w') < \ell(w)$, so $1\in W$ is the unique minimal element in $W$ under this order.
:::


It turns out that if we set $w = w' t$ instead, this results in the same partial order.
If you restrict $T$ to simple reflections, this yields the **weak Bruhat order**
In this case, the left and right versions differ, yielding the **left/right weak Bruhat orders** respectively.
[^2]

[^2]: Note that this is because conjugating a simple reflection may not yield a simple reflection again.

Recall that lie algebras yield finite crystallographic coxeter groups.

:::{.proposition title="Properties of the Bruhat Order"}
For $(W, S)$ a coxeter group,

a. $w' \leq w$ iff $w'$ occurs as a subexpression/subword of every reduced expression $s_1 \cdots s_n$ for $w$, 
where a subexpression is any subcollection of $s_i$ in the same order.[^3]

[^3]: Note that this implies that $1$ is not only a minimal element in this order, but an infimum.

b. Adjacent elements $w', w$ (i.e. $w' < w$ and there does not exist a $w''$ such that $w' < w'' < w$) in the Bruhat order differ in length by 1.

c. If $w' < w$ and $s\in S$, then $w' s \leq w$ or $w's \leq ws$ (or both).
  i.e., if $\ell(w_1) = 2 = \ell(w_2)$, then the size of $\theset{w\in W \suchthat w_1 < w < w_2}$ is either 0 or 2.

\begin{tikzpicture}
    \node (0) at (0, 2) [label=$w_2$]{};
    \node (1) at (2, 0) {};
    \node (2) at (-2, 0) {};
    \node (3) at (0, -2) [label=below:$w_1$]{};
    \draw (0.center) to (2.center);
    \draw (2.center) to (3.center);
    \draw (0.center) to (1.center);
    \draw (1.center) to (3.center);
\end{tikzpicture}
:::

## Properties of Universal Enveloping Algebras

Let $\lieg$ be any lie algebra, and $\phi: \lieg \to A$ be any map into an associative algebra.
Then there exists an object $U(\lieg)$ and a map $i$ such that the following diagram commutes:

\begin{tikzcd}
&  & U(\lieg) \arrow[dd, "\tilde \phi", dotted] \\
\lieg \arrow[rrd, "\phi"] \arrow[rru, "i"] &  &                                            \\
&  & A                                         
\end{tikzcd}

where $\tilde \phi$ is a map in the category of associative algebras.

Moreover any lie algebra homomorphism $\lieg_1 \to \lieg_1$ induces a morphism of associative algebras $U(\lieg_1) \to U(\lieg_2)$, where $\lieg$ generates $U(\lieg)$ as an algebra.

$U(\lieg)$ can be constructed as 
$$
U(\lieg) = T(\lieg)/ \generators{ [x,y] - x\tensor y - y\tensor x \suchthat x,y\in\lieg}
.$$
Note that this ideal is not necessarily homogeneous.

:::{.proposition title="Properties of the Universal Enveloping Algebra"}
\envlist

- Usually noncommutative
- Left and right Noetherian
- No zero divisors
- $\lieg \actson U(\lieg)$ by the extension of the adjoint action, $(\ad x)(u) = xu - ux$ for $x\in \lieg, u\in U(\lieg)$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Poincaré-Birkhoff-Witt (PBW"}
If $\theset{x_1, \cdots x_n}$ is a basis for $\lieg$, then $\theset{x_1^{t_1}, \cdots, x_n^{t_n} \suchthat t_i \in \ZZ^+}$ (noting that $x^n = x\tensor x \tensor \cdots x$ and $\ZZ^+$ includes 0) is a basis for $U(\lieg)$.
:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
$i:\lieg \to U(\lieg)$ is injective, so we can think of $\lieg \subseteq U(\lieg)$.
If $\lieg$ is semisimple, then it admits a triangular decomposition $\lieg = \lien^- \oplus \lieh \oplus \lien$ and choosing a compatible basis for $\lieg$ yields $U(\lieg) = U(\lien^-)\tensor U(\lieh) \tensor U(\lien)$.

If $\phi: \lieg \to \gl(V)$ is any Lie algebra representation, it induces an algebra representation $U(\lieg)$ of $U(\lieg)$ on $V$ and vice-versa.
It satisfies $$x\cdot (y \cdot v) - y\cdot (x \cdot v) = [x y] \cdot v$$ for all $x,y \in \lieg$ and $v\in V$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that this lets us go back and forth between Lie algebra representations and associative algebra representations, i.e. the theory of modules over rings.
:::

:::{.remark}
A note on notation: $\mathcal Z(\lieg)$ denotes the center of $U(\lieg)$.

:::

## Integral Weights

We have a Euclidean space $E = \RR \Phi^+$, the $\RR\dash$span of the roots.


:::{.definition title="Integral Weight Lattice"}
We also have the **integral weight lattice** 
$$
\Lambda = \theset{\lambda \in E \suchthat (\lambda, \alpha\dual) \in \ZZ ~\forall \alpha\in\Phi (\text{or}~ \Phi^+ ~\text{or}~ \Delta)}
.$$
:::

:::{.definition title="Ordering of Weights"}
There is a sublattice $\Lambda_r \subseteq \Lambda$, which is an additive subgroup of finite index.
There is a partial order of $\Lambda$ on $E$ and $\lieh\dual$.
We write 
\[
\mu \leq \lambda \iff \lambda - \mu \in \ZZ^+ \Delta = \ZZ^+ \Phi^+
\]
:::

:::{.definition title="Dominant Integral Weights"}
For a basis $\Delta = \theset{\alpha_1, \cdots, \alpha_n}$, define a dual basis $(w_i ,\alpha_j\dual) = \delta_{ij}$.
The fundamental weights are given by a $\ZZ\dash$basis for $\Lambda$.
Then $\Lambda$ is a free abelian group of rank $\ell$, and 
\[
\Lambda^+ = \ZZ^+ w_1 + \cdots + \ZZ^+ w_\ell
\]
are the **dominant integer weights**.[^5]

[^5]: Note that in Jantzen's book, $X$ is used for $\Lambda$ and $X^+$ correspondingly. 

:::

