# Monday March 2nd

## Indecomposable Projectives

:::{.remark}
Recall that

- $\OO$ has enough projectives
 
- Every $M\in \OO$ has a projective cover,

Let $\pi_\lambda: P(\lambda) \to L(\lambda)$ be the projective cover of $L(\lambda)$.
:::

:::{.claim}
$P(\lambda)$ is indecomposable.
:::

:::{.proof title="of claim"}
$\ker \pi_\lambda$ is a maximal submodule of $P(\lambda)$.
Suppose $N$ were another submodule of $P(\lambda)$, then $\restrictionof{\pi_\lambda}{N} \neq 0$, so it maps to $N \to L(\lambda)$, which is a contradiction.
So $P(\lambda)$ has a *unique* maximal submodule.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
\envlist

a. Every indecomposable projective in $\OO$ is isomorphic to $P(\lambda)$ for some $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$  
b. Any projective $P = \bigoplus_{\lambda \in \lieh\dual} d_\lambda P(\lambda)$, where $d_\lambda$ counts the multiplicity in the direct sum.
c. For all $M\in \OO$, $\dim \hom_\OO(P(\lambda), M) = [M: L(\lambda)]$. In particular, 
\[
\dim \Endo_\OO(P(\lambda)) = [P(\lambda): L(\lambda)]
.\]

:::

:::{.proof title="of a"}
Suppose $P\in \OO$ is an indecomposable projective, then $P$ has at least one simple quotient $L(\lambda)$.

[Diagram]

Since $\pi_\lambda$ is essential, $\psi$ must be onto.

[Diagram]

This splits the sequence, so $P(\lambda) \divides P$.
Since $P$ is indecomposable, $P = P(\lambda)$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of b"}
$P$ is a direct sum of indecomposable modules, but a direct summand of a projective module is projective.
Thus $P = \bigoplus d_\lambda P(\lambda)$.

So $P(\lambda)$ has $L(\lambda)$ as its unique simple quotient, and 
\[
\dim \hom_\OO(P(\lambda), L(\lambda)) = \dim_\OO \Endo(L(\lambda)) = 1
.\]
Note that $\hom_\OO(P(\mu), L(\lambda)) = 0$ for $\mu \neq \lambda$, so 
\[
\dim \hom_\OO(\oplus d_\lambda P(\mu), L(\lambda)) = d_\lambda
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Think about how to relate composition series in a SES.
:::

:::{.proof title="of c"}
Both sides are additive in $M$, i.e. for $0 \to M_1 \to M \to M_2 \to 0$, we have $[M: L(\lambda)] = [M_1: L(\lambda)] + [M_2: L(\lambda)]$.
Since $P(\lambda)$ is projective, $\hom(P(\lambda), \wait)$ is exact, so the dimensions of the Hom spaces are additive, and induction can be used on the Jordan-Holder length of $M$.
Start with $M = L(\lambda)$ a simple module, then 
\[
\dim \hom(P(\lambda), L(\mu)) =  \delta_{\mu, \lambda} = [ L(\mu): L(\lambda)]
.\]


Note that the transpose dual functor $(\wait)\dual$ is an exact contravariant functor, taking 

- Projective to injectives (and vice versa)
- Direct sums to direct sums

Thus the indecomposable injectives are the duals of projectives, i.e. $P(\lambda)\dual \definedas Q(\lambda)$, the *injective hull* of $L(\lambda)$.
This is characterized by an essential monomorphism 
$$
i_\lambda: L(\lambda) \injects Q(\lambda)
,$$
i.e. $\im i_\lambda$ intersects *every* nonzero submodule of $Q(\lambda)$.

:::

## Standard Filtrations of Projective

:::{.remark}
Every $M\in \OO$ admits a filtration whose sections are highest weight modules, but it's rare for the sections to be Vermas.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
Each projective module in $\OO$ has a standard filtration.
$(P(\lambda): M(\mu)) \neq 0 \implies \mu \geq \lambda$, and $(P(\lambda): M(\lambda)) = 1$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Recall the proof of theorem 3.8: there exists a dominant weight $\mu$ and a finite dimensional $L$ such that $P \definedas M(\mu) \tensor L \surjects M(\lambda) \surjects L(\lambda)$, and $P$ is projective by a previous theorem.
Every projective is a direct sum of indecomposables, and $P(\lambda) \divides P$ is a direct summand.
$P$ has a standard filtration involving $M(\lambda)$ once, and all other sections are of the form $M(\tau)$ for $\tau > \lambda$.

By 3.7b, direct summands $P(\lambda)$ of$P$ inherit standard filtrations with the same properties.
In particular, $P(\lambda) \surjects M(\lambda) \surjects L(\lambda)$, and the highest weights are the same as those for $P$.
Since any projective is a finite direct sum of $P(\lambda)$s and any direct sum of modules with standard filtrations has a standard filtration, thus $P$ does as well.

:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
Each projective $P\in \OO$ is determined up to isomorphism by its formal character.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that a Verma and its dual may have the same formal character without being isomorphic.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Write $P = \bigoplus d_\lambda P(\lambda)$, then it is sufficient to show that $\ch P$ determines the $d_\lambda$s.
Use induction on the length $\ell(P)$.
For $\ell(P) = 1$, we have $P = L(\lambda) = P(\lambda)$.
For $\ell(P) > 1$, by 1.16 we can write $\ch P =  \sum c_\mu \ch M(\mu)$ for unique $c_\mu \in \ZZ$, since the Vermas span $K(\OO)$.
By the theorem, $c_\mu > 0$ for all $\mu$.

Trick: choose $\lambda$ minimal for which $c_\lambda > 0$.
By the theorem, $P(\lambda)$ must occur exactly $c_\lambda$ times as a summand of $P$.
Thus $c_\lambda = d_\lambda$ by definition.
Now mod out by $d_\lambda P(\lambda)$ and apply the induction hypothesis.
:::

## BGG Reciprocity


:::{.theorem title="BGG Reciprocity"}
For all $\lambda, \mu \in \lieh\dual$, 
\[
(P(\lambda): M(\mu)) = [M(\mu): L(\lambda)] = [M(\mu)\dual: L(\lambda)]
,\]
where the last equality holds because $\ch M(\mu) = \ch M(\mu)\dual$.
:::


:::{.remark title="Proof strategy"}
We'll show that that first and last are both equal to $\dim \hom_\OO(P(\lambda), M(\mu)\dual)$.
This lets us relate projectives, indecomposable projectives, and simple (?) modules.
:::


### Proof of BGG Reciprocity

**Step 1:**
Note that $\dim \hom_\OO(P(\lambda), M) = [M: L(\lambda)]$ for any $M\in \OO$ by theorem 3.9c.
So take $M =  M(\mu)\dual$.

**Step 2:**
For any $M\in \OO$ with a standard filtration, we know by theorem 3.7 that $(M: M(\mu)) = \dim \hom(M, M(\mu)\dual)$.
So take $M = P(\lambda)$.


:::{.example title="?"}
Let $\lieg = \liesl(2, \CC)$.
Let $\lambda \in \lieh\dual \cong \CC$.
If $\lambda \not\in \Lambda^+$, then $\OO_{\chi_\lambda}$ is boring: it is semisimple with one simple module.
For $\lambda \in \Lambda^+ \cong \ZZ^{>0}$, define $\mu = s_\alpha \cdot \lambda = -\lambda - 2$.
Then 
\[
0 \to M(\mu) \to M(\lambda) \to L(\lambda) \to 0
,\]
where $M(\mu) = L(\mu) = N(\lambda)$.

:::



Note that $P(\lambda)$ has a filtration of length 1, since its quotients must be Vermas.
If $\lambda$ is dominant, then $M(\lambda) = P(\lambda)$.
$P(\mu)$ has a standard filtration with $M(\mu)$ occurring once at the top, and $(P(\mu) : M(\lambda)) =  [M(\lambda): L(\mu)] = 1$.

\begin{tikzpicture}
\draw [decorate,decoration={brace,amplitude=10pt, mirror},xshift=-4pt,yshift=0pt] (0,0) -- (0,1.2) node [black,midway,xshift=0.8cm] {\footnotesize $M(\mu)$};
\draw [decorate,decoration={brace,amplitude=10pt},xshift=-4pt,yshift=0pt] (0,-0.25) -- (0,-2) node [black,midway,xshift=0.8cm] {\footnotesize $M(\lambda)$};
\node at (-1,1) {$L(\mu)$};
\draw (-1.7, .25) -- (-.2, .25);
\node at (-1,-.5) {$L(\lambda)$};
\draw (-1.7, -1) -- (-.2, -1);
\node at (-1,-1.5) {$L(\mu)$};
\end{tikzpicture}

This yields a SES 
\[
0 \to M(\lambda) \to P(\mu) \to M(\mu) \to 0
,\] 
which is a **nonsplit extension**.
This gives an example of a self-dual projective, i.e. $P(\mu)\dual = Q(\mu) \cong P(\mu)$.

## Unknown Diagrams

\todo[inline]{Find where these diagrams were supposed to go.}

\begin{tikzcd}
&  & P \arrow[lldd, "\psi", dashed] \arrow[dd, "\varphi"] &  &   \\
&  &                                                      &  &   \\
P(\lambda) \arrow[rr, "\pi_\lambda ?"'] &  & L(\lambda) \arrow[rr]                                &  & 0
\end{tikzcd}

\begin{tikzcd}
&  & P \arrow[lldd, dashed] \arrow[dd, no head, Rightarrow] &  &   \\
&  &                                                        &  &   \\
P \arrow[rr, "\psi"'] &  & P(\lambda) \arrow[rr]                                  &  & 0
\end{tikzcd}

\begin{align*}
\frac{L(\lambda)  }{L(\mu)} = P(\lambda)
.\end{align*}


\begin{tikzcd}
M(\mu) \arrow[rr, "\varphi_2 \neq 0"', bend right] \arrow[rr, "\varphi_1 \neq 0", bend left]                                &  & M(\lambda)                             &                                        \\
&  &                                        &                                        \\
&  &                                        & L_1 \arrow[luu, "\subset" description] \\
\soc M(\mu) = L  \text{ simple}  \arrow[rr, hook] \arrow[rrru, hook] \arrow[uuu, "\subset"] &  & L_2 \arrow[uuu, "\subset"] &                                       
\end{tikzcd}


