# Wednesday January 8

> Course Website: 
  <https://faculty.franklin.uga.edu/brian/math-8030-spring-2020>

## Chapter Zero: Review

> Material can be found in Humphreys 1972.

:::{.exercise title="Assignment Zero"}
Practice writing lowercase mathfrak characters!
:::

In this course, we'll take $k = \CC$.


:::{.definition title="Lie Algebra"}
Recall that a Lie Algebra is a vector space $\lieg$ with a bracket 
\[
[\wait, \wait]: \lieg\tensor \lieg \to \lieg
\]
satisfying

- $[x x] = 0$ for all $x\in \lieg$

- $[x [y z]] = [[x y] z] + [y [x z]]$ (The Jacobi identity)
:::

Note that the last axiom implies that $x$ acts as a derivation.

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that $[x y] = -[y x]$.

> Hint: Consider $[x+y, x+y]$.
> Note that the converse holds iff $\ch k \neq 2$.

:::



:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that Lie Algebras never have an identity.
:::

:::{.definition title="Abelian Lie Algebras"}
$\lieg$ is *abelian* iff $[x y] = 0$ for all $x,y\in\lieg$.
:::

There are also the usual notions (define for rings/algebras) of:

- Subalgebras,
  - A vector subspace that is closed under brackets.
- Homomorphisms
  - I.e. a linear transformation $\phi$ that commutes with the bracket, i.e. $\phi([x y]) = [\phi(x) \phi(y)]$.
- Ideals

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Given a vector space (possibly infinite-dimensional) over $k$, then (exercise) $\liegl(V) \definedas \mathrm{End}_k(V)$ is a Lie algebra when equipped with $[f g] = f\circ g - g\circ f$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Representation"}
A *representation* of $\lieg$ is a homomorphism $\phi: \lieg \to \gl(V)$ for some $V$.
:::

:::{.example title="The adjoint representation"}
The adjoint representation is 
\[  
\ad: \lieg &\to \liegl(\lieg) \\
\ad(x)(y) &\definedas [x y]
.\]
:::


Representations give $\lieg$ the structure of a module over $V$, where $x\cdot v \definedas \phi(x)(v)$.
All of the usual module axioms hold, where now 
\[
[x y] \cdot v \da x\cdot(\cdot v) - y\cdot(x\cdot v)
\]

:::{.example title="?"}
The trivial representation $V = k$ where $x\cdot a = 0$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Irreducible"}
$V$ is *irreducible* (or *simple*) iff $V$ as exactly two $\lieg\dash$invariant subspaces, namely $0, V$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Completely Reducible Modules"}
$V$ is *completely reducible* iff $V$ is a direct sum of simple modules, and *indecomposable* iff $V$ can not be written as $V = M \oplus N$, a direct sum of proper submodules.
:::


There are several constructions for creating new modules from old ones:

- The *contragradient/dual*:

  :::{.definition title="Contragradient dual"}
  \[
  V\dual &\definedas \hom_k(V, k) \qquad
  (x\cdot f) &= -f(x\cdot v)
  .\]
  for $f\in V\dual, x\in \lieg, v\in V$.
  :::

- The direct sum $V\oplus W$ where 
  \[
  x\cdot(v, w) = (x\cdot v, x\cdot w)
  \]

- The tensor product where 
  \[
  x\cdot(v\tensor w) = x\cdot v \tensor w + v\tensor x\cdot w
  \]

- $\hom_k(V, W)$ where 
  \[
  (x\cdot f)(v) = x\cdot f(v) - f(x\cdot v)
  \]
  
  -  Note that if we take $W=k$ then the first term vanishes and this recovers the dual.

## Semisimple Lie Algebras

:::{.definition title="Derived Ideal"}
The *derived ideal* is given by $\lieg^{(1)} \definedas [\lieg \lieg] \definedas \spanof_k\qty{\theset{[x y] \suchthat x,y\in\lieg }}$.
:::

This is the analog of the commutator subgroup.

:::{.lemma title="The derived ideal detects abelian algebras"}
$\lieg$ is abelian iff $\lieg^{(1)} = \theset{0}$, and 1-dimensional algebras are always abelian.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
This follows because if $[x y] \definedas xy = yx$ then $[x y] = 0 \iff xy = yx$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Simple algebras"}
A lie algebra $\lieg$ is *simple* iff the only ideals of $\lieg$ are $0, \lieg$ and $\lieg^{(1)} \neq \theset{0}$.

:::


Note that thus rules out the zero modules, abelian lie algebras, and particularly 1-dimensional lie algebras.

:::{.definition title="Derived Series and Solvability"}
The *derived series* is defined by $\lieg^{(2)} = [\lieg^{(1)} \lieg^{(1)}]$, continuing inductively.
$\lieg$ is said to be **solvable** if $\lieg^{(n)} = 0$ for some $n$.
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
Abelian implies solvable.
:::

:::{.definition title="Nilpotent Algebras"}
The **lower central series** of $\lieg$ is defined as $\lieg_{j+1} \da [\lieg, \lieg_j]$. The lie algebra $\lieg$ is **nilpotent** if this series terminates at zero.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that an *element* $x$ of a Lie algebra is nilpotent iff $\ad x$ is nilpotent as a matrix (so $x$ is *ad-nilpotent*), i.e. $\ad(x)^n =0$ for some $n$.
There is a result, Engel's theorem, which relates these two notions: a Lie algebra is nilpotent iff all of its elements are nilpotent (with potentially different $n$s depending on $x$).
:::

:::{.definition title="Semisimple"}
$\lieg$ is *semisimple* (s.s.) iff $\lieg$ has no nonzero solvable ideals.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that simple implies semisimple.
:::


:::{.remark}
\envlist

1. Semisimple algebras $\lieg$ will usually have solvable subalgebras.
2. $\lieg$ is semisimple iff $\lieg$ has no nonzero abelian ideals.
:::

:::{.definition title="Killing Form"}
The *Killing form* is given by $\kappa: \lieg \tensor \lieg \to k$ where $\kappa(x, y) = \tr(\ad x ~\ad y)$, which is a symmetric bilinear form.
:::


:::{.lemma title="?"}
\[
\kappa([x y], z) = \kappa(x, [y z])
\]
:::

:::{.definition title="Radical"}
If $\beta: V^{\tensor 2} \to k$ is any symmetric bilinear form, then its radical is defined by

\[
\rad \beta = \theset{v\in V \suchthat \beta(v, w) = 0 ~\forall w\in V}
.\]

:::

:::{.definition title="Nondegenerate Bilinear Forms"}
A bilinear form $\beta$ is *nondegenerate* iff $\mathrm{rad}\beta = 0$.
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
$\mathrm{rad}\kappa \normal \lieg$ is an ideal, which follows by the above associative property.

:::

:::{.theorem title="Characterization of Semisimplicity Using the Killing Form"}
$\lieg$ is semisimple iff $\kappa$ is nondegenerate.
:::


:::{.example title="?"}
The standard example of a semisimple lie algebra is 

\[
\lieg = \liesl(n, \CC) \definedas \theset{x\in \liegl(n, \CC) \suchthat \tr(x) = 0 }
\]
:::

:::{.remark}
From now on, $\lieg$ will denote a semisimple lie algebra over $\CC$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Weyl's Complete Reducibility Criterion"}
Every finite dimensional representation of a semisimple $\lieg$ is completely reducible.
:::


In other words, the category of finite-dimensional representations is relatively uninteresting -- there are no extensions, so everything is a direct sum.
Thus once you classify the simple algebras (which isn't terribly difficult), you have complete information.
