# Friday February 28th

Recall that $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$ is *dominant* iff for all $\alpha \in \Phi^+$, we have $(\lambda + \rho, \alpha\dual) \not\in\ZZ^{<0}$.
Equivalently, as in Proposition 3.5c, $\lambda$ is maximal in its $W_{[\lambda]}\cdot$ orbit.

## Constructing Projectives 

Proposition (Dominant Weights Yield Projective Vermas, Projective Tensor Finite-Dimensional is Projective)
:   a. If $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$ is dominant, then $M(\lambda)$ is projective in $\OO$.
  
    b. If $P\in \OO$ is projective and $\dim L < \infty$< then $P \tensor_\CC L$ is projective.

Proof
:   a. We want to find a $\psi$ making this diagram commute:
      \begin{center}
      \begin{tikzcd}
      &  & v^+ \in M(\lambda) \arrow[dd, "\phi"] \arrow[lldd, "\psi", dashed] &  &   \\
      &  &                                                                    &  &   \\
      M \arrow[rr, "\pi"] &  & p(v^+) \in N \arrow[rr] &  & 0
      \end{tikzcd}
      \end{center}

      Assume $\phi \neq 0$.
      Since $M(\lambda) \in \OO_{\chi_\lambda}$, we have $\phi(M(\lambda)) \subset N^{\chi_\lambda}$.
      WLOG, we can assume $M, N \in \OO_{\chi_\lambda}$, and if $v^+$ is maximal, $p(v^+)$ is maximal.
      By surjectivity of $\pi$, there exists a $v\in M$ such that $v \mapsto p(v^+)$.
      Then $M \supset U(\lien) v$ is finite dimensional, so it contains a maximal vector whose weight is linked to $\lambda$ since $M\in \OO_{\chi_\lambda}$.

      But since $\lambda$ is dominant, there is no such weight greater than $\lambda$, so $v$ itself must be this maximal vector.
      Then by the universal property of $M(\lambda)$, there is a map $\psi: M(\lambda) \to M$ where $v^+ \mapsto v$ making the diagram commute.

      > Note nice property: Vermas are projective iff maximal in orbit.

    b. We want to show $F = \hom_\OO(P\tensor L, \wait)$ is exact.
      But this is isomorphic to 
      $$\hom_\OO(P, \hom_\CC(L, \wait)) \cong \hom_\OO(P, L\dual \tensor_\CC \wait).$$

      Thus $F$ is the composition of two exact functors: first do $L\dual \tensor_\CC \wait$, which is exact since $\CC$ is a field, and $\hom_\OO(P,\wait)$ is exact since $P$ is projective.

Example
: Let $M(-\rho)$ be the Verma of highest weight $\rho$.
  This is irreducible because $-\rho$ is antidominant, and projective since $-\rho$ is dominant.
  In fact $W\cdot(-\rho) = \theset{-\rho}$ by a calculation.
  Thus $$L(-\rho) = M(-\rho) = P(-\rho) = M(-\rho)\dual,$$ so all 4 members of the highest weight category here are equal.
  
  > By convention, there is notation $M(-\rho) = \Delta(-\rho)$ and $M(-\rho)\dual = \nabla(-\rho)$.

  Note that we always have $\ext_0(L(-\rho), L(-\rho)) = 0$, and every $\OO_{\chi_{-\rho}} \in M$ is equal to $\bigoplus L(-\rho)^{\oplus n}$.

  > So this is referred to as a *semisimple category*.

Theorem (O has Enough Projectives and Injectives)
: $\OO$ has enough projectives and injectives.

Proof
:   **Step 1**
    
    For all $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$, there exists a projective mapping onto $L(\lambda)$.
    Clearly $\mu \definedas \lambda + n\rho$ is dominant for $n\gg 0$, i.e. for $n$ large enough there are no negative integers resulting from inner products with coroots.
    Thus $M(\mu)$ is projective, and since $n\rho \in \Lambda^+$, we have $\dim L(n\rho) < \infty$.
    This implies $P \definedas M(\mu) \tensor L(n\rho)$ is projective by the previous proposition.

    Apply $w_0$ reverses the weights, so $w_0(n\rho) = -n\rho$.
    Note that this doesn't happen for all weights, so this property is somewhat special for $\rho$.
    In particular, since $n\rho$ was a highest weight, $-n\rho$ is a lowest weight.

    By remark 3.6, $P$ has a quotient isomorphic to $M(\mu - n\rho) = M(\lambda)$.
    Thus $P \surjects M(\lambda) \to L(\lambda)$, and $L(\lambda)$ is a quotient of a projective.
    This establishes the result for simple modules.

    > Remark: By theorem 3.6, $P$ has a standard filtration with sections $M(\mu + \nu)$ for $\nu \in \Pi(L(n\rho))$.
    > In particular $M(\lambda)$ occurs just once since $$\dim L(n\rho)_{-n\rho} = \dim L(n\rho)_{w_0(n\rho)} = \dim L(n\rho)_{n\rho} = 1,$$ with all $\mu + \nu > \lambda$.

    **Step 2**

    Use induction on Jordan-Hilder length to prove that any $0\neq M\in \OO$ is a quotient of a projective.
    For $\ell = 1$, $M$ is simple, and by Step 1 this case holds.
    
    Assume $\ell > 1$, then $M$ has a submodule $L(\lambda)$ obtained by taking the bottom of a Jordan-Holder series, so there is a SES
    $$0 \to L(\lambda) \mapsvia{\alpha} M \mapsvia{\beta} N \to 0.$$

    By induction, since $\ell(N) = \ell(M) - 1$, there exists a projective module $Q \mapsvia{\phi} N$ which extends to a map $\psi: Q \to M$.

    If $\psi$ is surjective, we are done.
    Otherwise, then the composition length forces $\psi(Q) \cong N$, and by commutativity there is a section $\gamma: N \to \psi(Q)$ splitting this SES.
    Thus $M \cong L(\lambda) \oplus N$, and by 1, there are projectives $P \oplus Q$ projecting onto each factor, so $M$ is projective.

    \begin{center}
    \begin{tikzcd}
    0 \arrow[rr] &  & L(\lambda) \arrow[rr, "\alpha"] &  & M \arrow[rr, "\beta"] &  & N \arrow[rr] \arrow[ll, "\gamma", dotted, bend left]  &  & 0 \\
                &  &                                 &  &                       &  &                                                       &  &   \\
                &  &                                 &  &                       &  & P \arrow[uu, "\varphi"'] \arrow[lluu, "\psi", dashed] &  &  
    \end{tikzcd}
    \end{center}

## 3.9 Indecomposable Projectives

Definition (A Projective Cover)
: A *projective cover* of $M\in \OO$ is a map $\pi: P_M \to M$ where $P_M$ is projective and $\pi$ is an *essential epimorphism*, i.e. no proper submodule of $P_M$ is mapped surjectively onto $M$ by $\pi_M$.

It is an algebraic fact that in an Artinian (abelian) category with enough projectives, every module has a projective cover that is unique up to isomorphism.

> See Curtis and Reiner, Section 6c.

Definition (The Projective Cover for a Weight)
: For $\lambda \in \lieh\dual$, denote $\pi_\lambda: P(\lambda) \surjects L(\lambda)$ to be a fixed projective cover of $L(\lambda)$.
