---
sort: 040
title: Divisors
---















# Divisors

## Definitions

-   Types of divisors:

    -   What is a **prime** divisor?
    -   What is a **principal** divisor?
    -   What is a **Weil** divisor?
    -   What is a **Cartier** divisor?
    -   What is an **effective** divisor?
    -   What is a **reduced** divisor?
    -   What is an [[ample divisor]]?
    -   What is a [[very ample]] divisor?
    -   What is a [nef divisor](nef%20divisor)?
    -   What is a [big divisor](big%20divisor)?
    -   What is a [[SNC | Unsorted/simple%20normal%20crossings.html]] divisor?
    -   What is a [[simple normal crossings (SNC) | Unsorted/simple%20normal%20crossings.html]] divisor?

-   What is the divisor of zeros and poles of $f \in k(X)^{\times}$?

-   What is the **pullback of a divisor**?

-   What is an [[invertible sheaf | Unsorted/invertible%20sheaves.html]]?

-   What is the **invertible sheaf** associated to a divisor?

-   What does it mean for divisors to be **linearly equivalent**?

-   What does it mean for two divisors to be **numerically equivalent**?

-   What is the **divisor class group**?

-   What is the **Picard group**?

-   What is the **divisor associated to a section** of a bundle?

-   For $D$ a prime divisor and $p\in \mathop{\mathrm{supp}}D$, what is the **multiplicity** of $p$ in $D$?

-   For $D$ a divisor, what is ${\mathcal{O}}_X(D)$?

-   What is a **polarization**?

-   What is a variety of **general type**?

-   What is the **ramification divisor** of a surjective morphism $f:X\to Y$ of smooth projective curves?

    -   What is the **ramification index**?
    -   What is a **branch point**?
    -   What is the **branch locus**?

-   What is a **linear system**?

    -   What is a **complete linear system**?
        -   What is the complete linear system associated to a section?
    -   What is the **base locus** of a linear system?
    -   What does it mean for a linear system to be **base point free**?

-   What is the **Riemann-Roch space**?

## Results

-   When do Weil and Cartier divisors coincide?

## Problems

-   Show that the hyperplane sections of a projective variety $X$ form a base point free linear system of effective divisors on $X$.
    -   Show that if $X$ is normal, then a generic element of this system is a smooth and reduced divisor.
-   Show that ${ \operatorname{Cl}} ({\mathbb{A}}^n_{/ {k}} ) = 0$
-   Show that ${ \operatorname{Cl}} ({\mathbb{P}}^n_{/ {k}} ) \cong {\mathbb{Z}}$, generated by the class of $H = V(x_i)$.
