---
title: "Divisors"
sort: 040
---

# Divisors

## Definitions

- Types of divisors:
	- What is a **prime** divisor?
	- What is a **principal** divisor?
	- What is a **Weil** divisor?
	- What is a **Cartier** divisor?
	- What is an **effective** divisor?
	- What is a **reduced** divisor?
	- What is an [[ample divisor]]?
	- What is a [[very ample]] divisor?
	- What is a [nef divisor](nef%20divisor)?
	- What is a [big divisor](big%20divisor)?
	- What is a [SNC](Unsorted/simple%20normal%20crossings.md) divisor?
	- What is a [simple normal crossings (SNC)](Unsorted/simple%20normal%20crossings.md) divisor?

- What is the divisor of zeros and poles of $f \in k(X)\units$?
- What is the **pullback of a divisor**?
- What is an [invertible sheaf](Unsorted/invertible%20sheaves.md)?
- What is the **invertible sheaf** associated to a divisor?
- What does it mean for divisors to be **linearly equivalent**?
- What does it mean for two divisors to be **numerically equivalent**?
- What is the **divisor class group**?
- What is the **Picard group**?
- What is the **divisor associated to a section** of a bundle?
- For $D$ a prime divisor and $p\in \supp D$, what is the **multiplicity** of $p$ in $D$?
- For $D$ a divisor, what is $\OO_X(D)$?
- What is a **polarization**?
- What is a variety of **general type**?

- What is the **ramification divisor** of a surjective morphism $f:X\to Y$ of smooth projective curves?
  - What is the **ramification index**?
  - What is a **branch point**?
  - What is the **branch locus**?

- What is a **linear system**?
  - What is a **complete linear system**?
	- What is the complete linear system associated to a section?
  - What is the **base locus** of a linear system?
  - What does it mean for a linear system to be **base point free**?

- What is the **Riemann-Roch space**?

## Results

- When do Weil and Cartier divisors coincide?

## Problems

- Show that the hyperplane sections of a projective variety $X$ form a base point free linear system of effective divisors on $X$.
  - Show that if $X$ is normal, then a generic element of this system is a smooth and reduced divisor.
- Show that $\Cl(\AA^n\slice k) = 0$
- Show that $\Cl(\PP^n\slice k) \cong \ZZ$, generated by the class of $H = V(x_i)$.