# Unit 1: Functions

:::{.theorem title="The Pythagorean Theorem"}
If $a,b$ are the legs of a right triangle with hypotenuse $c$, there is a relation
\[
a^2 + b^2 = c^2
.\]
:::


:::{.theorem title="The Distance Formula"}
If $p = (x_1, y_1)$ and $q = (x_2, y_2)$ are points in the Cartesian plane, then there is a **distance function**
\[
d: \ts{ \text{Pairs of points } (p, q) } \to \RR \\
(p, q) &\mapsto d(p, q) \da \sqrt{ (x_2 - x_1)^2 + (y_2 - y_q)^2}
.\]
:::

\todo[inline]{Law of cosines}

:::{.definition title="Linear Functions"}
A function $f:\RR \to \RR$ is **linear** if and only if $f$ has a formula of the following form:
\[
f(x) = \alpha x + \beta && \alpha, \beta \in \RR
.\]
:::

:::{.definition title="Intercepts"}
Given a function $f: \RR\to \RR$, an **$x\dash$intercept** of $f$ is a point $(x_0, 0)$ on the graph of $f$, so $f(x_0) = 0$. 
Equivalently, it is a point on the intersection of the graph and the $x\dash$axis.

\

A **$y\dash$intercept** of $f$ is a point $(0, y_0)$ on the graph of $f$, so $f(0) = y_0$.
Equivalently, it is a point on the intersection of the graph and the $y\dash$axis.
:::

:::{.definition title="Relation"}
A **relation** on two sets $X$ and $Y$ is a set of ordered pairs $(x, y) \in X \cross Y$, so $R$ can be described as a set:
\[
R = \ts{ (x_0, y_0), (x_1, y_2), \cdots } 
.\]

The **domain** of the relation is the set of all $x\in X$ that occur in the first slot of these pairs, and the **range** is the set of all $y\in Y$ that occur in the second slot.
:::

:::{.definition title="Function"}
A relation $R$ is a **function** if it satisfies the following *deterministic property*: for every $x_0\in \dom(R)$, there is exactly *one* pair of the form $(x_0, y_0) \in R$.
:::

:::{.remark}
This says we can think of $X$ as "inputs" and $Y$ as "output", and a function is a way to unambiguously assign inputs to outputs.
It can be useful to think of functions like programs: if I send in an $x$, what $y$ should the program return to me?
If I run this program today, tomorrow, and 100 years from now, sending in the same $x$ every time, we might want it to give the same output every time, which is the *deterministic* property: I can *determine* a single unique output if I know what the input is.
If my program tells me that $2+2=4$ today but $2+2=5$ tomorrow, who knows what it will return in 100 years! 
We can't "determine" it.
:::

:::{.slogan}
For domains and ranges:

- Domains: the set of *meaningful* inputs that the function "knows" how to handle.
- Ranges: the set of *attainable* outputs that we can expect.

:::

:::{.remark}
To determine a domain:

1. Naively hope it is *all* of $\RR$.
2. Throw out "problematic" points.
3. Draw a number line and write out what you are left with in interval notation.

:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Define
\[
f: \RR &\to \RR \\
x &\mapsto {1\over x}
.\]

Then $\dom(f) = \RR \smz = (-\infty, 0) \union (0, \infty)$ and $\range(f) = \RR$.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Define
\[
f: \RR &\to \RR \\
x &\mapsto \sqrt{x}
.\]

Then $\dom(f) = \RR \sm (-\infty, 0) = [0, \infty)$ and $\range(f) = [0, \infty)$.
:::





