# Homology

What is homology? 
Seems to be ubiquitous in mathematics, pops up in number theory, algebraic geometry, topology (obviously), etc.

Many routes to motivate it, we'll take the topological tact. 
Coming up:

1. Simplicial Homology
   
   - Of simplicial complexes, a la Poincaré ~1900
   - Easier to compute

2. Singular Homology

   - Easier to define and more general
   - Harder to compute, need theorems


:::{.definition title="$n\dash$simplex"}
An *n-simplex* $\sigma = (a_0, \cdots a_n) \subseteq \RR^n$ is a *convex hull* of $n+1$ points when the points are *affinely independent*.
:::


The *convex hull* is given by 
\[
\theset{\sum \lambda_i a_iL \mid 0 \leq \lambda_i \leq 1, \sum \lambda_i = 1}
,\] 
i.e. set of centers of gravity of masses placed at vertices.

They are affinely independent if there is a unique expression of every point in barycentric coordinates.

\[
\sum v_i a_i = 0 \text{ and } \sum v_i = 0 \implies v_i = 0 ~\forall i
.\] 
It follows that
\[
\sum \lambda_i a_i = \sum \mu_i a_i
\implies
\lambda_i = \mu_i ~\forall i
\]

The *face* of an $n$-simplex are the subsets where the barycentric coordinates are 0. Consider a triangle with points $\lambda a, \mu b, \nu c$, then one edge is a face ($\lambda=0$), as is another $(\nu = 0$), as is the point $\mu b$ where $\nu  = \lambda = 0$. An $n$-simplex has $2^n - 1$ faces, including the entire thing ($2^n - 2$ otherwise)


:::{.definition title="Simplicial Complex"}
A *simplicial complex* is a set $K$ of simplexes in $\RR^n$, say $K = \theset{\sigma_0, \sigma_1 \cdots \sigma_n}$, such that they are pasted together correctly, i.e.

1. $\sigma \in K \text{ and } \tau \subset \sigma \implies \tau \in K$
2. If $\sigma, \sigma' \in K$ then they overlap in a common face, i.e. either $\sigma \intersect \sigma' = \emptyset \text{ or } \sigma\intersect\sigma'$ is a face of both $\sigma,\sigma'$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Geometric Realization"}
Given such a $K$, its *geometric realization* is given by the topological space 
\[
\abs{K} \da \Union_{\sigma\in K} \sigma \subseteq \RR^n
.\]

:::

:::{.definition title="Triangulation"}
A *triangulation* of a space $X$ is a homeomorphism $h: X \into \abs{K}$ for some $K$.
:::


:::{.example}
$S^1$ is homeomorphic to a triangle, which has 6 total simplexes: three points $\Delta_0$, and 3 edges $\Delta_1$.
Similarly, $S^2$ is homeomorphic to a tetrahedron with 14 simplexes.
:::

:::{.remark}
We don't want to allow anything particularly curved, or anything with multiple edges.
:::


:::{.definition title="Abstract Simplicial Complex"}
An *abstract simplicial complex* is a set $V$ of vertices together with a set $K \subset P(V)$ of subsets of $V$ which is closed under taking subsets ($\sigma \in K \text{ and } \tau \subseteq \sigma \implies \tau \in K$)
:::


:::{.example}
$V = \theset{1,2,3,4}$, then the 4-simplex can be described as 
\[
K = \theset{\theset{1}, \theset{2}, \theset{3}, \theset{4}, \theset{1,2}. \theset{2,3}, \theset{1,3}, \theset{1,2,3}}
.\]

:::


:::{.definition title="Geometric Realization of a Simplicial Complex"}
We have a notion of *geometric realization*: we can embed $K$ inside $\RR^{\abs{V}}$ where each basis vector is in correspondence with each vertex. 
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that here $\sigma$ maps to the convex hull of its vertices.
The moral of the story here is that abstract simplicial complexes can be realized as geometric simplicial complexes.
:::

:::{.definition title="Orientation of a Simplex"}
An *orientation* of a simplex is a choice of ordering of vertices up to even permutations, i.e. $(a,b,c) = (c,a,b) = (b,c,a) \neq (b,a,c) = (c,b,a) = (a,c,b)$. 
:::

:::{.example}
A point is a special case, there are two orientations, $\pm *$. 
Take $+*$ to be the canonical orientation. 
:::

:::{.example}
How does this work in 3 dimensions? 
Take $(a,b,c,d)$ be an orientation on a tetrahedron - this is roughly equivalent to choosing an oriented frame, but there are many interpretations. 
So just view as equivalence classes after modding out by even permutations.
:::


:::{.definition title="?"}
If $K$ is a simplicial complex, let $C_n(K)$ be the free abelian group on oriented $n$-simplexes in $K$ quotiented by $\bar\sigma \sim -\sigma$. 
Add twice as many simplexes then quotient out..? 
Avoids making choices of orientation everywhere! 
Then each oriented $n$-simplex maps into $C_n(K)$ in a natural way.
:::

:::{.definition title="?"}
A boundary map $\bd: C_n K \into C_{n-1} K$ by linearly extending the formula 
\[
\bd(a_0 \cdots a_n) = \sum_{i=1}^n (-1)^i (a_0, \cdots \hat{a_i} \cdots a_n)
,\] 
where the summand denotes the face spanned by all vertices except $a_i$.
:::

:::{.example}
We can directly compute $\del (a,b) = (b) - (a)$ and $\del(a,b,c) = (b,c) - (a,c) -+(a,b)$.
So a line segment $a \mapsto b$ goes to $-a$ and $+b$.
An oriented triangle $abc$ goes to the three line segments oriented in the same way.

What happens?
:::

Need to check that $\bd$ is well defined - check that applying a transposition, e.g. $(a_0 a_1)$. 


\[
\bd (a_1, a_0, a_2, \cdots a_n) = (a_0, a_2, \cdots a_n) - (a_1, a_2, \cdots a_n) + \sum \text{stuff} = -\bd (a_0, a_1, a_2, \cdots a_n)
,\]
so equality is preserved under even permutations.

:::{.proposition title="Simplicial Boundary Map is Well-Defined"}
\[  
\bd^2 = 0
.\]
:::


Consider
\[
C_n K \into_{\del_n} C_{n-1} K \into_{\del_{n-1}} C_{n-2} \into \cdots
\]



