# Monday February 17th

Last time: $R$ is a ring, $M$ a finitely-generated $R\dash$modules, $J\normal R$.

Theorem (Nakayama) 
: If $M = JM$, then there exists an $x\in R$ with $x = 1 \mod (J)$ such that $xM = (0)$.

Theorem (Generalized Nakayama)
: $M = JM \iff J + \ann M = R$.

Proof
: The reverse implication is immediate, the forward is by Nakayama.

## Injective Modules

Exercise
: Show that for $R=  R_1 \cross R_2$ and $M = M_1 \cross M_2$, $M_i$ is an $R_i\dash$module.

Recall that every $R\dash$module is free $\iff R$ is a field.

*Question:*
What is the analogous condition for every $R\dash$module to be projective?

*Answer:*
Every SES 
$$
0\to M_1 \to M_2 \to M_3 \to 0
$$ 
of $R\dash$modules splits.

Focusing on $M_2$: every submodule $M_1$ of $M_2$ is a direct summand.

Theorem (Characterization of Semisimplicity)
:   For an $R\dash$module $M$, TFAE

    1. Every submodule of $M$ is a direct summand.
    2. $M$ is a direct sum of simple modules (semisimple).
    3. $M$ is generated by its simple submodules.

Definition (Simple Modules)
: $M$ is **simple** iff $\exists 0 \subsetneq N \subsetneq_R M$.

> In this case, $M \cong R/\ann M$ (i.e. cyclic, monogenic) and the $\ann M$ is maximal.

Proof
: Omitted, see chapter 8 of notes.

Thus every $R\dash$module is projective iff every $R\dash$module is semisimple.

Definition (Injective Modules)
: Dually, now focusing on $M_1$, every SES starting with $M_1$ is split iff whenever $M_1 \leq M_2$, $M_1$ is a direct summand.
  In this case we say $M_1$ is *injective*.

Proposition (Characterization of Semisimple Modules)
:   For $R$ a ring, TFAE

    1. Every SES of $R\dash$modules splits
    2. Every $R\dash$module is projective
    3. Every $R\dash$module is semisimple
    4. Every $R\dash$module is injective
    5. (Claim) $R$ is itself a semisimple $R\dash$module.

Proof
: $3 \implies 5$ is clear, and we'll prove $5\implies 3$ shortly using *Baer's Criterion*.

Definition (Semisimple Rings)
: $R$ is **semisimple** iff for all $I\normal R$, there exists a $J\normal R$ such that $I\oplus J = R$.
Moreover, $\ann(I) = J$ and $\ann(J) = I$.

Exercise (easy)
: If $R_i$ are semisimple, $R_1 \cross R_2$ is semisimple.

Corollary
: Fields are semisimple, so any finite product of fields is semisimple.

In fact, the converse is true:

Theorem (Semisimple Rings are Products of Fields)
: If $R$ is semisimple, then $R$ is a product of fields.

Note that everything works here for left modules over non-commutative rings.

Let $R$ be a ring.


Theorem (Wedderburn-Artin)
: A ring[^ring_note] $R$ is semisimple iff $R\cong \prod_{i=1}^r M_{n_i}(D_i)$ a product of matrix rings over division rings.

[^ring_note]: Potentially non-commutative, but reduces to previous theorem in commutative case.

Let $0\to M_1 \mapsvia{\iota} M_2 \to M_3 \to 0$ be a SES.

> Note that splitting is slightly stronger than $M_2 \cong M_1 \oplus M_3$.

This sequence is split iff there exists a retraction $\pi: M_2 \to M_1$ such that $\iota\circ\pi = \id_{M_2}$.
In this case, $M_2 \cong \iota(M_1) \oplus \ker \pi$.

Definition (Injective Modules)
: An $R\dash$module $E$ is *injective* iff every SES $0\to E \to M_2 \to M_3 \to 0$ admits a retraction $\pi: M_2 \to E$.

Theorem (Characterization of Injective Modules)
:   For an $R\dash$module $E$, TFAE

    1. $E$ is injective
    2. Reversing arrows of projective condition, there exists a lift of the following form:

    \begin{center}
    \begin{tikzcd}
    &  &                                      &  & E                                    \\
    &  &                                      &  &                                      \\
    0 \arrow[rr] &  & M \arrow[rr, hook] \arrow[rruu, "\varphi"] &  & N \arrow[uu, "\exists \Phi", dotted]
    \end{tikzcd}
    \end{center}

    3. If $M\injects N$, then $\hom(N, E) \surjects \hom(M, E)$.
    4. The contravariant functor $\hom(\wait, E)$ is exact.

Note big difference: no analog of being a direct summand of a free module! 
Free modules are usually not injective.

Example
:   $\ZZ$ is a free but not injective $\ZZ\dash$module.
    Take $0 \to \ZZ \mapsvia{\times 2} \ZZ \to \ZZ/2\ZZ \to 0$.
    If this splits, we would have $\ZZ \cong \ZZ \oplus \ZZ/2\ZZ$ as $\ZZ\dash$modules.
    
    Why isn't this true?
    $\ZZ$ is a domain, the LHS is torsionfree, and the RHS has torsion.

Example
:   Suppose now $R$ is a domain and not a field, then let $a$ be a non-unit and run the same argument with multiplication by $a$.
    This would yield $R \cong R \oplus R/aR$, where the LHS is torsionfree and the RHS has torsion.
    So $R$ itself need not be an injective $R\dash$module.

Definition (Self-Injective Modules)
: A ring $R$ is *self-injective* iff $R$ is injective as an $R\dash$module.

Example
: A field or a semisimple ring.

Claim
: Let $\tilde R$ be a PID, $\pi$ a prime element, $n\in \ZZ^+$, then take $R\definedas \tilde R/(\pi^n)$.
  Then $R$ is self-injective.

Example
:   Let $R = \ZZ/p^n\ZZ$, and let $M$ be a finite $p\dash$primary commutative group (i.e. a $p\dash$group).
    Then $\exp M = p^n \iff \ann M = (p^n)$.
    $M$ is a faithful $\ZZ/p^n\ZZ\dash$module, so there exists an element $x\in M$ such that $\#\generators{x} = p^n$.
    There is a SES of $\ZZ/p^n \ZZ\dash$modules

    \begin{align*}
    0\to \generators{x} \to M \to M/\generators{x} \to 0
    .\end{align*}

    Since $\generators{x} \cong \ZZ/p^n \ZZ$, which is self-injective, so there exists a module $N$ such that $M = \generators{x} \oplus N \cong \ZZ/p^n \ZZ \oplus N$.
    Continuing on $N$ yields a decomposition of $M$ into a sum of cyclic submodules.

**Conclusion: a finitely generated torsion module over a PID is a direct sum of cyclic modules.**

In general, to show a module is injective, we need to consider lifts over all pairs of modules $M\injects N$.
How to do this in practice?

Theorem (Baer's Criterion)
:   If suffices to check the lifting condition for $N = R$ and $M = I\normal R$.
    I.e. if there is a lift of the following form:

    \begin{center}
    \begin{tikzcd}
                &  &                                            &  & E                                    \\
                &  &                                            &  &                                      \\
    0 \arrow[rr] &  & I \arrow[rr, hook] \arrow[rruu, "\varphi"] &  & R \arrow[uu, "\exists \Phi", dotted]
    \end{tikzcd}
    \end{center}

    then $E$ is injective.

Proof
: Omitted for time.

Application
:   Let $R$ be a semisimple $R\dash$module and let $E$ be any $R\dash$module.
    Let $I\normal R$, and $f\in \hom(I, E)$.
    If $R$ is semisimple, then there exists a $J\normal R$ such that $R = I \oplus J$.
    So extend $f$ to $f \oplus 0$, which yields a lift:
    
    \begin{center}
    \begin{tikzcd}
    &  &                                      &  & E                                            \\
    &  &                                      &  &                                              \\
    0 \arrow[rr] &  & I \arrow[rr, hook] \arrow[rruu, "f"] &  & R = I\oplus J \arrow[uu, "{(f, 0)}", dotted]
    \end{tikzcd}
    \end{center}

Exercise
: Prove the claim that $R$ is self-injective for $R = \tilde R/(\pi^n)$ above.
