# Functors as Spaces (Tuesday January 14th)

Last time:
representability of functors, and specifically projective space $\PP_{/\ZZ}^n$ constructed via a functor of points, i.e.

\[
h_{\PP^n_{/\ZZ} }: \Sch\op &\to \Set \\
s &\mapsto \PP^n_{/\ZZ}(s) = \theset{ \OO_s^{n+1} \to L \to 0}
.\]

for $L$  a line bundle, up to isomorphisms of diagrams:

\begin{tikzcd}
\OO_{s}^{n+1} \arrow[dd, no head, Rightarrow] \arrow[rr] &  & L \arrow[rr] \arrow[dd, "\cong"] &  & 0 \\
&  &                                  &  &   \\
\OO_{s}^{n+1} \arrow[rr]                                 &  & M \arrow[rr]                     &  & 0
\end{tikzcd}


That is, line bundles with $n+1$ sections that globally generate it, up to isomorphism.
The point was that for $F_i \subset \PP_{/\ZZ}^n$ where
$$
F_i(s) = \theset{\OO_s^{n+1} \to L \to 0 \suchthat s_i \text{ is invertible}}
$$
are representable and can be glued together, and projective space represents this functor.

:::{.remark}
Because projective space represents this functor, there is a universal object:
\begin{tikzcd}
  \OO_{\PP_{\ZZ}^n}^{n+1} 
  \arrow[rr] 
&  
& L \arrow[dd, equal] 
    \arrow[rr] 
&  
&
0 
\\
&  
&                                              
&  
&   
\\
&  
& \OO_{\PP_{\ZZ}^n}(1)
&  
&
\end{tikzcd}
and other functors are pullbacks of the universal one. (Moduli Space)
:::


:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that $\PP_{/\ZZ}^n$ is proper over $\spec \ZZ$.
Use the evaluative criterion, i.e. there is a unique lift

\begin{tikzcd}
\spec k \arrow[dd] \arrow[rrr]            &  &  & \PP^n_{\ZZ} \arrow[dd] \\
&  &  &                        \\
\spec R \arrow[rrr] \arrow[rrruu, dashed] &  &  & \spec \ZZ
\end{tikzcd}
:::

## Generalizing Open Covers

:::{.definition title="Equalizer"}
For a category $C$, we say a diagram $X \to Y \rightrightarrows Z$ is an *equalizer* iff it is universal with respect to the following property:

\begin{tikzcd}
X \arrow[rr] &  & Y \arrow[rr, shift left=.5ex] \ar[rr, shift right=.5ex] &  & Z \\
&  &                                                &  &   \\
&  & S \arrow[lluu, dashed, "\exists!"] \arrow[uu] \arrow[rruu] &  &
\end{tikzcd}

where $X$ is the universal object.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
For sets, $X = \theset{y \suchthat f(y) = g(y)}$ for $Y \mapsvia{f, g} Z$.
:::

:::{.definition title="?"}
A **coequalizer** is the dual notion,
\begin{tikzcd}
&  & S                       &  &                                     \\
&  &                         &  &                                     \\
Z \arrow[rruu] \arrow[rr, shift left=.5ex] \ar[rr, shift right=.5ex] &  & Y \arrow[uu] \arrow[rr] &  & X \arrow[lluu, "\exists!"', dashed]
\end{tikzcd}
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Take $C = \Sch_{/S}$, $X_{/S}$ a scheme, and $X_\alpha \subset X$ an open cover.
We can take two fiber products, $X_{\alpha \beta}, X_{\beta, \alpha}$:

\begin{tikzcd}
X_\alpha \arrow[rr]                   &  & X                  &  &  & X_\beta \arrow[rr]                    &  & X                   \\
&  &                    &  &  &                                       &  &                     \\
X_{\alpha\beta} \arrow[uu] \arrow[rr] &  & X_\beta \arrow[uu] &  &  & X_{\beta\alpha} \arrow[uu] \arrow[rr] &  & X_\alpha \arrow[uu]
\end{tikzcd}

These are canonically isomorphic.
:::


In $\Sch_{/S}$, we have

\begin{tikzcd}
\disjoint_{\alpha\beta} X_{\alpha\beta}
\arrow[rr, shift left=.5ex, "f_{\alpha\beta}"]
\arrow[rr, shift right=.5ex,"g_{\alpha\beta}", swap]
&  & \disjoint_{\alpha} X_\alpha \arrow[rr] &  & X
\end{tikzcd}


where
\[
f_{\alpha\beta}: X_{\alpha\beta} &\to X_\alpha \\
g_{\alpha\beta}: X_{\alpha\beta} &\to X_\beta
;\]

form a coequalizer.
Conversely, we can glue schemes.
Given $X_\alpha \to X_{\alpha\beta}$ (schemes over open subschemes), we need to check triple intersections:

\begin{tikzpicture}[scale=0.25]
\node[draw,circle,minimum size=5cm,inner sep=0pt, label={[xshift=-1.25cm, yshift=-1.0cm] $X_\alpha$ }] at (-3,3) {};
\node[draw,circle,minimum size=5cm,inner sep=0pt, label={[xshift=1.25cm, yshift=-1.0cm] $X_\beta$ }] at (3,3) {};
\node[draw,circle,minimum size=5cm,inner sep=0pt, label={[yshift=-4.25cm] $X_\gamma$ }] at (0,-3) {};
\end{tikzpicture}


Then $\varphi_{\alpha\beta}: X_{\alpha\beta}\mapsvia{\cong} X_{\beta\alpha}$ must satisfy the **cocycle condition**:

:::{.definition title="Cocycle Condition"}
Maps $\varphi_{\alpha\beta}: X_{\alpha\beta}\mapsvia{\cong} X_{\beta\alpha}$ satisfy the **cocycle condition** iff

1. $$\varphi_{\alpha\beta}\inv \qty{ X_{\beta\alpha} \intersect X_{\beta\gamma} } = X_{\alpha\beta} \intersect X_{\alpha \gamma},$$
noting that the intersection is exactly the fiber product $X_{\beta\alpha} \cross_{X_\beta} X_{\beta \gamma}$.

2. The following diagram commutes:

\begin{tikzcd}
X_{\alpha\beta} \intersect X_{\alpha\gamma} \arrow[rdd, "\varphi_{\alpha\beta}"'] \arrow[rr, "\varphi_{\alpha\gamma}"] && X_{\gamma\alpha} \intersect X_{\gamma\beta} \\
&&                                             \\
& X_{\beta\alpha}\intersect X_{\beta\gamma} \arrow[ruu, "\varphi_{\beta\gamma}"'] &
\end{tikzcd}
:::
  

Then there exists a scheme $X_{/S}$ such that $\disjoint_{\alpha\beta} X_{\alpha\beta} \rightrightarrows \disjoint X_\alpha \to X$ is a coequalizer; this is the gluing.

Subfunctors satisfy a patching property because morphisms to schemes are locally determined.
Thus representable functors (e.g. functors of points) have to be (Zariski) sheaves.


:::{.definition title="Zariski Sheaf"}
A functor $F: (\Sch_{/S})\op \to \Set$ is a **Zariski sheaf** iff for any scheme $T_{/S}$ and any open cover $T_\alpha$, the following is an equalizer:
$$
F(T) \to \prod F(T_\alpha) \rightrightarrows \prod_{\alpha\beta} F(T_{\alpha\beta})
$$
where the maps are given by restrictions.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Any representable functor is a Zariski sheaf precisely because the gluing is a coequalizer.
Thus if you take the cover
$$
\disjoint_{\alpha\beta} T_{\alpha\beta} \to \disjoint_{\alpha}T_\alpha \to T
,$$
since giving a local map to $X$ that agrees on intersections if enough to specify a map from $T\to X$.

Thus any functor represented by a scheme automatically satisfies the sheaf axioms.

:::
  
  
:::{.definition title="Subfunctors and Open/Closed Functors"}
Suppose we have a morphism $F' \to F$ in the category $\Fun(\Sch_{/S}, \Set)$.

- This is a **subfunctor** if $\iota(T)$ is injective for all $T_{/S}$.

- $\iota$ is **open/closed/locally closed** iff for any scheme $T_{/S}$ and any section $\xi \in F(T)$ over $T$, then there is an open/closed/locally closed set $U\subset T$ such that for all maps of schemes $T' \mapsvia{f} T$, we can take the pullback $f^* \xi$ and $f^*\xi \in F'(T')$ iff $f$ factors through $U$.

:::


:::{.remark}
This says that we can test if pullbacks are contained in a subfunctors by checking factorization.
This is the same as asking if the subfunctor $F'$, which maps to $F$ (noting a section is the same as a map to the functor of points), and since $T\to F$ and $F' \to F$, we can form the fiber product $F' \cross_F T$:
\begin{tikzcd}
F' \ar[r] & F \\
& \\
F' \cross_F T \ar[r, "g"] \ar[uu] & T \ar[uu, "\xi" swap]
\end{tikzcd}

and $F' \cross_F T \cong U$.
Note: this is almost tautological!
Thus $F' \to F$ is open/closed/locally closed iff $F' \cross_F T$ is representable and $g$ is open/closed/locally closed.
I.e. base change is representable.
:::



:::{.exercise title="?"}
\envlist

1. If $F' \to F$ is open/closed/locally closed and $F$ is representable, then $F'$ is representable as an open/closed/locally closed subscheme

2. If $F$ is representable, then open/etc subschemes yield open/etc subfunctors
:::


:::{.slogan}
Treat functors as spaces.
:::

We have a definition of open, so now we'll define coverings.


:::{.definition title="Open Covers"}
A collection of open subfunctors $F_\alpha \subset F$ is an **open cover** iff for any $T_{/S}$ and any section $\xi \in F(T)$, i.e. $\xi: T\to F$, the $T_\alpha$ in the following diagram are an open cover of $T$:

\begin{tikzcd}
F_\alpha \ar[r] & F \\
& \\
T_\alpha \ar[uu] \ar[r] & T \ar[uu, "\xi" swap]
\end{tikzcd}

:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Given
$$
F(s) = \theset{\OO_s^{n+1} \to L \to 0}
$$
and $F_i(s)$ given by those where $s_i \neq 0$ everywhere, the $F_i \to F$ are an open cover.
Because the sections generate everything, taking the $T_i$ yields an open cover.
:::

## Results About Zariski Sheaves

:::{.proposition title="?"}
A Zariski sheaf $F: (\Sch_{/S})\op \to \Set$ with a representable open cover is representable.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Let $F_\alpha \subset F$ be an open cover, say each $F_\alpha$ is representable by $x_\alpha$.
Form the fiber product $F_{\alpha\beta} = F_\alpha \cross_F F_\beta$.
Then $x_\beta$ yields a section (plus some openness condition?), so $F_{\alpha\beta} = x_{\alpha\beta}$ representable.
Because $F_\alpha \subset F$, the $F_{\alpha\beta} \to F_\alpha$ have the correct gluing maps.


This follows from Yoneda (schemes embed into functors), and we get maps $x_{\alpha\beta} \to x_\alpha$ satisfying the gluing conditions.
Call the gluing scheme $x$; we'll show that $x$ represents $F$.
First produce a map $x\to F$ from the sheaf axioms.
We have a map $\xi \in \prod_\alpha F(x_\alpha)$, and because we can pullback, we get a unique element $\xi \in F(X)$ coming from the diagram
\[
F(x) \to \prod F(x_\alpha) \rightrightarrows \prod_{\alpha\beta} F(x_{\alpha\beta})
.\]
:::




:::{.lemma title="?"}
If $E \to F$ is a map of functors and $E, F$ are Zariski sheaves, where there are open covers $E_\alpha \to E, F_\alpha \to F$ with commutative diagrams

\begin{tikzcd}
E \ar[r] & F \\
  & \\
E_\alpha \ar[uu] \ar[r, "\cong"] & F_\alpha \ar[uu]
\end{tikzcd}


(i.e. these are isomorphisms locally), then the map is an isomorphism.
:::


With the following diagram, we're done by the lemma:
\begin{tikzcd}
X \ar[r] & F \\
  & \\
X_\alpha \ar[uu] \ar[r, "\cong"] & F_\alpha \ar[uu]
\end{tikzcd}


:::{.example title="?"}
For $S$ and $E$ a locally free coherent $\OO_s$ module,
\[
\PP E(T) = \theset{f^* E \to L \to 0} / \sim
\]
is a generalization of projectivization, then $S$ admits a cover $U_i$ trivializing $E$.
Then the restriction $F_i \to \PP E$ were $F_i(T)$ is the above set if $f$ factors through $U_i$ and empty otherwise.
On $U_i$, $E \cong \OO_{U_i}^{n_i}$, so $F_i$ is representable by $\PP_{U_i}^{n_i - 1}$ by the proposition.
Note that this is clearly a sheaf.
:::



:::{.example title="?"}
For $E$ locally free over $S$ of rank $n$, take $r<n$ and consider the functor
$$
\Gr(k, E)(T) = \theset{f^*E \to Q \to 0} /\sim
$$
(a Grassmannian) where $Q$ is locally free of rank $k$.
:::


:::{.exercise title="?"}
\envlist

1. Show that this is representable

2. For the Plucker embedding
$$
\Gr(k, E) \to \PP \wedge^k E
,$$
a section over $T$ is given by $f^*E \to Q \to 0$ corresponding to
$$
\wedge^k f^*E \to \wedge^k Q \to 0
,$$
noting that the left-most term is $f^* \wedge^k E$.
Show that this is a closed subfunctor.

> That it's a functor is clear, that it's closed is not.

:::
  


Take $S = \spec k$, then $E$ is a $k\dash$vector space $V$, then sections of the Grassmannian are quotients of $V \tensor \OO$ that are free of rank $n$.
Take the subfunctor $G_w \subset \Gr(k, V)$ where
$$
G_w(T) = \theset{\OO_T \tensor V \to Q \to 0} \text{ with } Q \cong \OO_t\tensor W \subset \OO_t \tensor V
.$$
If we have a splitting $V = W \oplus U$, then $G_W = \AA(\hom(U, W))$.
If you show it's closed, it follows that it's proper by the exercise at the beginning.

> Thursday:
> Define the Hilbert functor, show it's representable.
> The Hilbert scheme functor gives e.g. for $\PP^n$ of all flat families of subschemes.
