# Uniform Vanishing Statements (Thursday January 30th)

Recall how we constructed the Hilbert scheme of hypersurfaces
$$
\hilb_{\PP_k^n}^{P_{m, d}} = \PP H^0(\PP^n; \OO(d))\dual
$$
A section $\hilb_{\PP_k^n}^{P}(s)$ corresponds to $z\in \PP^n_s$.
We can look at the exact sequence

\[
0 \to I_Z(m) \to \OO_{\PP_S^n} \mapsvia{\text{restrict}} \OO_z(m) \to 0
.\]

as $\PP_s^n \mapsvia{\pi_s} S$, so we can pushforward along $\pi$, which is left-exact, so

\[
0 \to \pi_{s*} I_Z(m) \to \pi_{s*} \OO_{\PP_S^n}  = \OO_S \tensor H^0(\PP^n; \OO(m)) \to \OO_z(m) \to R^1 \pi_{s*} I_Z(m) \to \cdots
.\]

*Idea:*
$Z \subset \PP_k^n$ will be determined (in families!) by the space of degree $d$ polynomials vanishing on $Z$ (?), i.e.
$$
H^0(\PP^n, I_z(m)) \subset H^0(\PP^n, \OO(m))
$$
for $m$ very large.
This would give a map of functors
$$
\hilb_{\PP_k^n}^{P} \to \Gr(N, H^0(\PP^n, \OO(m) ))
.$$
If this is a closed subfunctor, a closed subfunctor of a representable functor is representable and we're done
.


:::{.remark}
We need to get an $m$ uniform in $Z$, and more concretely:

1. First need to make sense of what it means for $Z$ to be determined by $H^0(\PP^n, I_Z(m))$ for $m$ only depending on $P$.

2. This works point by point, but we need to do this in families.
  I.e. we'll use the previous exact sequence, and want the $R^1$ to vanish.
:::

:::{.slogan}
We need *uniform* vanishing statements.
There is a convenient way to package the vanishing requirements needed here.
From now on, take $k=\bar k$ and $\PP^n = \PP_k^n$.
:::

## $m\dash$Regularity

:::{.definition title="m-Regularity of Coherent Sheaves"}
A coherent sheaf $F$ on $\PP^n$ is **$m\dash$regular** if $H^i(\PP^n; F(m-i)) = 0$ for all $i> 0$.
:::



:::{.example title="?"}
Consider $\OO_{\PP^n}$, this is $0\dash$regular.
Line bundles on $\PP_n$ only have 0 and top cohomology.
Just need to check that $H^n(\PP^n; \OO(-n)) = 0$, but by Serre duality this is
\[
H^0(\PP^n; \OO(n) \tensor \omega_{\PP^n})\dual = H^0(\PP^n; \OO(-1))\dual = 0
.\]
:::



:::{.proposition title="?"}
Assume $F$ is $m\dash$regular.
Then

1. There is a natural multiplication map from linear forms on $\PP^n$,
 \[
  H^0(\PP^n; \OO(1)) \tensor H^0(\PP^n; F(k)) \to H^0(\PP^n; F(k+1))
  ,\]
  which is surjective for $k\geq n$.[^graded_module_note]

2. $F$ is $m'\dash$regular for $m' \geq m$.

3. $F(k)$ is globally generated for $k\geq m$, i.e. the restriction
  \[
  H^0(\PP^n; F(k)) \tensor \OO_{\PP^n} \to F(k) \to 0
  \]
  is exact (i.e. surjective).

[^graded_module_note]: 
Think of this as a graded module, this tells you the lowest number of small grade pieces needed to determine the entire thing.

:::

:::{.example title="?"}
$\OO$ is $m\dash$regular for $m \geq 0$ implies $\OO(k)$ is $-k\dash$regular and is also $m\dash$regular for$m\geq -k$.
:::

### Proof of 2 and 3

Induction on dimension of $n$ in $\PP^n$.
Coherent sheaves on $\PP^0$ are vector spaces, so no higher cohomology.

:::{.proof title="Step 1"}
Take a generic hyperplane $H \subset \PP^n$, there is an exact sequence
\[
0 \to \OO(-1) \to \OO \to \OO_H \to 0
.\]

where $\OO_H$ is the structure sheaf.
Tensoring with $H$ remains exact, so we get
\[
0 \to F(-1) \to F \to F_H \to 0
.\]

Why? $\AA^n \subset \PP^n$, let $A = \OO_{\PP^n}(\AA^n)$ be the polynomial ring over $\AA^n$.
Then the restriction of the first sequence to $\AA^n$ yields
$$
0 \to A \mapsvia{f} A \to A/f \to 0
,$$
and thus we want
$$
F \mapsvia{f} F \to F/fF \to 0
$$
which results after restricting the second sequence to $\AA^n$.
Thus we just want $f$ to not be a zero divisor.
If we take $f$ not vanishing on any associated point of $F$, then this will be exact.
Associated points: generic points arising by supports of sections of $F$.
$F$ is coherent, so it has finitely many associated points.
If $H$ does not contain any of the associated points of $F$, then the second sequence is indeed exact.
:::


:::{.proof title="Step 2"}
Twist up by $k$ to obtain
\[
0 \to F(k-1) \to F(k) \to F_H(k) \to 0
.\]
Look at the LES in cohomology to get
\[
H^i(F(m-i)) \to H^i(F_H(m-i)) \to H^{i+1}(F(m - (i+1)))
.\]
So $F_H$ is $m\dash$regular.
By induction, this proves statements 1 and 2 for all $F_H$.
So take $k = m+1-i$ and consider
\[
H^i(F(m-i)) \to H^i(F(m+1-i)) \to H^i(F_H(m+1-i))
.\]
We know 2 is satisfied, so the RHS is zero, and we know the LHS is zero, so the middle term is zero.
Thus $F$ itself is $m+1$ regular, and by inducting on $m$ we get statement 2.
:::


By multiplication maps, we get a commutative diagram:

\begin{tikzcd}
                                                        &  & H^0(\OO(1)) \tensor H^0(F(k)) \arrow[dd, "\beta"] \arrow[rrr] \arrow[rrrdd] &  &  & H^0(\OO(1))\tensor H^0(F_H(k)) \arrow[dd] \\
                                                        &  &                                                                             &  &  &                                           \\
H^0(F(k)) \arrow[rr, "H"] \arrow[rruu, "H \tensor \id"] &  & H^0(F(k+1)) \arrow[rrr, "\alpha", dashed]                                   &  &  & H^0(F_H(k+1))
\end{tikzcd}

We'd like to show the diagonal map is surjective.


:::{.observation}
\envlist

1. The top map is a surjection, since
$$
H^0(F(k)) \to H^0(F_H(k)) \to H^1(F(k-1)) = 0
$$
for $k\geq m$ by (2).

2. The right-hand map is surjective for $k\geq m$.

3. $\ker(\alpha) \subset \im(\beta)$ by a small diagram chase, so $\beta$ is surjective.

This shows (1) and (2) completely.

:::


:::{.proof title="of 3"}
We know $F(k)$ is globally generated for $k\gg 0$.
Thus for all $k\geq m$, $F(k)$ is globally generated by (1).
:::


:::{.theorem title="?"}
Let $P \in \QQ[t]$ be a Hilbert polynomial.
There exists an $m_0$ only depending on $P$ such that for all subschemes $Z \subset \PP^n_k$ with Hilbert polynomial $P_Z = P$, the ideal sheaf $I_z$ is $m_0\dash$regular.
:::
  

### Proof of Theorem

Induct on $n$.
For $n=0$, again clear because higher cohomology vanishes and there are no nontrivial subschemes.
For a fixed $Z$, pick $H$ in $\PP^n$ (and setting $I \definedas I_z$ for notation) such that
\[
0 \to I(-1) \to I \to I_H \to 0
.\]
is exact.
Note that the Hilbert polynomial $P_{I_H}(t) = P_I(t) - P_I(t-1)$ and $P_I = P_{\OO_{\PP^n}} - P_Z$.
By induction, there exists some $m_1$ depending only on $P$ such that $I_H$ is $m_1\dash$regular.
We get
\[
H^{i-1}(I_H(k)) \to H^i(I(k-1)) \to H^i(I(k)) \to H^i(I_H(k))
,\]
and for $k\geq m_1 - i$ the LHS and RHS vanish so we get an isomorphism in the middle.
By Serre vanishing, for $k \gg 0$ we have $H^i(I(k)) = 0$ and thus $H^i(I(k)) = 0$ for $k\geq m_i - i$.
This works for all $i > 1$, we have $H^i(I(m_i - i)) = 0$.
We now need to find $m_0 \geq m_1$ such that $H^1(I(m_0 - 1)) = 0$ (trickiest part of the proof).


:::{.lemma title="?"}
The sequence $\qty{\dim H^1(I(k))}_{k\geq m_i - 1}$ is *strictly* decreasing.[^explain_little_h]

[^explain_little_h]: 
Note: $h^1 = \dim H^1$.

:::


:::{.remark}
Given the lemma, it's enough to take $m_0 \geq m_1 + h^1(I(m_1 - 1))$.
Consider the LES we have a surjection
$$
H^0(\OO_Z(m_1 - 1)) \to H^1(I(m_1 - 1)) \to 0
.$$
So the dimension of the LHS is equal to $P_Z(m_1 - 1)$, using the fact that terms vanish and make the Euler characteristic equal to $P_Z$.
Thus we can take $m_0 = m_1 + P(m_1 - 1)$.
:::


:::{.proof title="of Lemma"}
Considering the LES
\[
H^0(I(k+1)) \mapsvia{\alpha_{k+1}} H^0(I_H(k+1)) \to H^1(I(k)) \to H^1(I(k+1)) \to 0
,\]
where the last term is zero because $I_H$ is $m_1\dash$regular.
So the sequence $h^1(I(k))$ is non-increasing.

:::{.observation}
If it does *not* strictly decrease for some $k$, then there is an equality on the RHS, which makes $\alpha_{k+1}$ surjective.
This means that $\alpha_{k+2}$ is surjective, since
\[
H^0(\OO(1)) \tensor H^0(I_H(k+1)) \surjects H^0(I_H(k+2))
.\]

:::
  
So if one is surjective, everything above it is surjective, but by Serre vanishing we eventually get zeros.
So $\alpha_{k+i}$ is surjective for all $i\geq 1$, contradicting Serre vanishing, since the RHS are isomorphisms for all $k$.
:::


Thus for any $Z\subset \PP^n_k$ with $P_Z = P$, we uniformly know that $I_Z$ is $m_0\dash$regular for some $m_0$ depending only on $P$.


:::{.claim}
$Z$ is determined by the degree $m_0$ polynomials vanishing on $Z$, i.e. $H^0(I_z(m_0))$ as a subspace of all degree $m_0$ polynomials $H^0(\OO(m_0))$ and has fixed dimension.
We have $H^i(I_Z(m_0)) = 0$ for all $i> 0$, and in particular $h^0(I_Z(m_0)) = P(m_0)$ is constant.
:::
  
It is determined by these polynomials because we have a sequence
\[
0 \to I_Z(m_0) \to \OO(m_0) \to \OO_Z(m_0) \to 0
.\]

We can get a commuting diagram over it
$$
0 \to H^0(I_Z(m_0)) \tensor \OO_{\PP^n} \to H^0(\OO(m_0)) \tensor \OO_{\PP^n} \to \cdots
$$
where the middle map down is just evaluation and.the first map down is a surjection.
Hence $I_Z(m_0)$, hence $\OO_Z$, hence $Z$ is determined by $H^0(I_Z(m_0))$.

> Next time: we'll show that this is a subfunctor that is locally closed.
