# Thursday March 5th

:::{.remark}
Which functors have a good deformation theory?

- $\pic$
- $\Hilb$
- Maps $X \to Y, X \to Y_A, X_A \to Y_A$
- Sheaves $E_0$ on $X_0$, $E$ on $X_A$, and $E$ on $X$.

Note the having an obstruction theory is equivalent to left-exactness in 
$$
\text{Def}\selfmap F(A') \to F(A) \to \text{Obs}
$$
for $F$ and $A' \to A$ A small thickening.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Schlessinger's Criterion"}
\envlist

- $F$ has a **pro-representable hull** iff $F$ has an obstruction theory.
- $F$ is **pro-representable** iff $F$ has a *left-exact* deformation theory.

:::

## Abstract Deformation Theory

:::{.remark}
There is a naïve deformation functor: given ${X_0}_{/k}$ a finite-type scheme, take $F_{\text{naïve}}(A)$ to be the set of $X_{/A}$, flat over $A$ such that $X\tensor k \cong x_0$.
Isomorphisms are given by diagrams over $\spec A$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	X && {X'} \\
	\\
	& {\spec A}
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=3-2]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=3-2]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMCwwLCJYIl0sWzIsMCwiWCciXSxbMSwyLCJcXHNwZWMgQSJdLFswLDJdLFsxLDJdLFswLDFdXQ==)


Note that this isn't quite a set, and is instead a point with non-trivial automorphisms, i.e. a connected groupoid.
To fix this, take $F(A)$ to be $X_{/A}$ flat over $A$, and take maps $X_0 \mapsvia{i} X$ such that $i\tensor k$ is an isomorphism.
Here isomorphisms are given by diagrams
\begin{tikzcd}
X_0 \arrow[d, "i"] \arrow[rr, "="] &  & X_0\arrow[d, "i"] \\
X \arrow[rd] \arrow[rr] & & X' \arrow[dl] \\
& \spec A &
\end{tikzcd}


:::

:::{.remark}
Upshot:
If ${X_0}_{/k}$ is smooth, then this $F$ has an obstruction theory given by 
\[
\text{Def} &= H^1(x_0, T_{x_0}) \\
\text{Obs} &= H^2(x_0, T_{x_0})
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Recall that for $X/k$, we can always define the sheaf of Kähler differentials $\Omega_{x_0/k}$, and $T_{x_0} =  \hom_{x_0}(\Omega_{x_o/k}, \OO_{x_0})$.
In general, if $x_0/k$ is *not* smooth, then $F$ (if it's a locally complete intersection?) has an obstruction theory given by 
\[
\text{Def} &= \ext_{x_0}^1(\Omega^1_{x_0}, \OO_{x_0}) \\
\text{Obs} &= \ext_{x_0}^2(\Omega^1_{x_0}, \OO_{x_0})
.\]
There is a local-to-global spectral sequence
$$
H^i \ext_{x_0}^j(\Omega_{x_0}^1, \OO_{x_0}) \abuts \Ext^{i+j}(\Omega^1_{x_0}, \OO_{x_0})
$$
In complete generality, there's a good answer using the cotangent complex.
In general $H^1(x_0, T_{x_0})$ and $H^2(x_0, T_{x_0})$ are Def and Obs of *locally trivial* deformations.
In this case $F(A)$ is given by $X_{/A}$ flat etc such that there exists an open cover $U_i$ of $X$ for which $U_i \cong U_i^{\text{red}} \tensor A$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Infinitesimal lifting property"}
Let $A/k$ be a finite type algebra and $R/k$ finite type and smooth (so $\spec R$ is smooth over $\spec A$).
Suppose we have a nilpotent thickening $0 \to J \to B' \to B$ of $k\dash$algebras with $J^n = 0$ for some $n$.
Then ???
\begin{tikzcd}
	&&&& {\spec R} \\
	\\
	{\spec B} && {\spec B'} && {\spec A}
	\arrow[from=3-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow[dashed, from=3-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow[from=1-5, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbNCwwLCJcXHNwZWMgUiJdLFs0LDIsIlxcc3BlYyBBIl0sWzIsMiwiXFxzcGVjIEInIl0sWzAsMiwiXFxzcGVjIEIiXSxbMiwxXSxbMiwwLCIiLDIseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJib2R5Ijp7Im5hbWUiOiJkYXNoZWQifX19XSxbMCwxXSxbMywyXSxbMywwXV0=)


:::

:::{.remark}
This lifting property is called *formal smoothness*, and is equivalent to smoothness for finite-type maps.
:::

## Proof

### Step 1

Given $f: \spec(B) \to \spec(R)$, for simplicity call induced map $f: R\to B$ given by pullback $f$ as well.
Any nilpotent thickening is a sequence of square zero thickenings, so we can assume $J^2 = 0$.

- Claim 1: Any two lifts $g-g' \in \text{Der}_A(R, J)$, so there is a torsor action
- Claim 2: $\OO\in \Der_A(R, J) \implies g + \theta$ is  lift.

Any two lifts $g, g'$ of $A\dash$algebras yield a diagram

\begin{tikzcd}
	J && {B'} && B \\
	\\
	&&&& R
	\arrow["f"', from=3-5, to=1-5]
	\arrow["g", from=3-5, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJKIl0sWzIsMCwiQiciXSxbNCwwLCJCIl0sWzQsMiwiUiJdLFszLDIsImYiLDJdLFszLDEsImciXSxbMCwxXSxbMSwyXV0=)

Recall that $\delta \in \text{Der}_A (R, M)$ with $\delta(ab) = a\delta(b) + b\delta(a)$ with $\delta(A\cdot 1) = 0$.

We have
$$
(g-g')(ab) 
&= g(ab) - g'(ab) \\
&= g(a) g(b) - g'(a) g'(b) \\
&= g(a) g(b) - g(a) g'(b) + g(a) g'(b) - g'(a) g'(b) \\
&= g(a) (g(b) - g'(b)) + g'(b) (g(a) - g'(a)) \\
&= g(a)(J) + g'(b)(J) \\
&= a(g-g')(b) + b(g-g')(a)
,$$
so $\delta \definedas g-g'$ is a derivation.

That $\delta(A\cdot 1) = 0$ follows from $\delta(1) = 0$ and $\delta(a\cdot 1) = a\cdot \delta(1)$.

For claim 2, we just need to show that $g + \theta$ is an $A\dash$algebra map.

$$
(g+\theta)(ab)
&= g(ab) + \theta(ab) \\
&= g(a)g(b) + a\theta(b) + b\theta(a) \\
&= g(a) g(b) + g(a)\theta(b) + g(b)\theta(a) (+ \theta(a)\theta(b)) \quad\text{since } J^2 =0 \\
&= ((g+\theta)(a)) ((g+\theta)(b))
.$$

So this gives us step 1.

### Step 2

Write a presentation for $R$ as $R = P / I$ where $P = A[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$.
We get some map $h$ in the following diagram where $h(I) \to J$

\begin{tikzcd}
J \arrow[r] & B' \arrow[r] & B \\
I \arrow[r]\arrow[u] & P \arrow[r]\arrow[u, "h"] & R\arrow[u, "f"]
\end{tikzcd}

Note that $\bar h: I/I^2 \to J$ is a map of $A\dash$modules.


### Step 3

By Hartshorne, any smooth thing regularly embeds into a smooth thing, yielding a SES
$$
0 \to I/I^2 \to \Omega_{P/A}\tensor R \to \Omega_{R/A} \to 0
$$

So take $\hom_{\rmod}(\wait, J)$, which potentially yields an $\ext_R^1(\Omega_{R/A}, J)$.
Again by the local-to-global spectral sequence, this is zero because the $H^1$ is zero by local-freeness and another $H^*$ is zero by smoothness.
We can then take $\bar h \in \Hom_{\rmod}(I/I^2, J)$, and by surjectivity we obtain a 
\[
\theta \in \Hom(\Omega_{P/A} \tensor R, J) = \Hom_P(\Omega_{P/A}, J) = \Der_A(P, J)
.\]

### Step 4
$h - \theta$ is an algebra morphism that kills $I$ and thus yields the desired lift.
Since $J^2 = 0$, $\restrictionof{h-\theta}{I}$ factors through $I/I^2$, and by construction is zero.


:::{.definition title="Formally smooth"}
Given functor $F, G: \Art_{/k} \to \Set$, we say $G\to F$ is **formally smooth** if it satisfies the infinitesimal lifting property for $A' \to A$ a thickening in $\Art_{/k}$.
See diagram.
:::


:::{.remark}
By Yoneda, we have $\hom_{\text{Fun}}(h_A, F) = F(A)$, i.e. $G(A') \surjects F(A') \cross_{F(A)} G(A)$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Pro-representability, pro-representable hull"}
For $F: \Art_{/k} \to \Set$ a deformation functor, then 

- $F$ is **pro-representable** if there exists a complete $k\dash$algebra $R$ such that the functor of points $h_R = F$, i.e. $h_R = \hat F$.

- A map $h_R \mapsvia{\xi} F$ is a **pro-representable hull** if $R$ is a complete $k\dash$algebra and $\xi$ is a formally smooth map.
:::


:::{.remark}
Upgraded Yoneda:
If $R$ is a complete $k\dash$algebra, then 
\[
\Hom_{\Fun(\Art_{/k}, \Set)} (h_R, F) = \hat F(R) = \inverselim_{n} F(R/\mfm^n)
,\] 
where $\hat F(R)$ is interpreted as *formal families* over $R$.
Thus $h_R \mapsvia{\xi} F$ is the same data as a section $\xi \in \hat F(R)$.
:::


:::{.definition title="Versal, miniversal, universal"}
A pair $(R, xi)$ with $\xi \in \hat F(R)$ is 

- **Versal** for $F$ $h_r\mapsvia{\xi} F$ is formally smooth.
  - I.e. any section of $F$ is obtained by pulling this one back.
    For $\eta \in F(A)$, this means $\spec(A) \mapsvia{f} \spec R/\mfm^n$ for $n\gg 0$, in which case $\eta = f^* \xi$.
- **Miniversal** or **semi-universal** if it is versal, formally smooth, and is an isomorphism on tangent spaces.
  - The map need not be unique.
- $(R, \xi)$ **pro-represents** (or is **universal** for) $F$ if $h_R \mapsvia{\cong} f$.
  - I.e. any section of $F$ is obtained by a *unique* pullback.

:::

Back to abstract deformations.

:::{.lemma title="?"}
For ${X_0}_{/k}$ and $X/k[\eps]$ flat with $X\tensor k \cong X_0$, the following sequence is exact:
$$
0\to \Der_k(\OO_{X_0}, \OO_{X_0}) \to \Aut_{k[\eps]} (X) \to \Aut_{k}(X_0)
$$
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
As in the previous argument, take $f-1 \in \Der_k(\OO_{X_0}, \OO_{X_0})$, then $1 + \theta$ is an automorphism for any such derivation $\theta$.
:::

