# Characterization of Smoothness (Thursday April 16th)

> Recap from last time: the cotangent complex answers an extension problem.

Given $X \mapsvia{f} Y$ and $Y \injects Y'$ a square zero thickening.
When can the pullback diagram be filled in?

\begin{tikzcd}
  X  
  \ar[r, dotted] 
  \ar[d] \arrow[dr, phantom, "\scalebox{1.5}{\color{black}$\lrcorner$}" , very near start, color=black]
& X' 
  \ar[d, dotted] 
\\
  Y 
  \ar[r] 
& Y'
\end{tikzcd}

- The existence is governed by $\mathrm{obs} \in \Ext^2( L_{X/Y}, f^* I)$
- The number of extensions by $\Ext^1( L_{X/Y}, f^* I)$
- The automorphisms by $\Ext^0( L_{X/Y}, f^* I)$

Suppose we're considering $k[\eps] \to k$, where $L_{X_{/k}} = \Omega_{X_{/k}}$, and $H^*(T_{X_{/k}})$ houses the obstruction theory.
For an embedded deformation $X \injects Y$, we have

\begin{tikzcd}
X  
  \ar[r, dotted]
& X' 
  \ar[d, dotted] 
\\
Y 
  \ar[r] 
& Y \cross_{\spec k} \spec k[\eps]
\end{tikzcd}

then $L_{X/Y} = I/I^2 [1] = N_{X/Y}\dual[1]$ and
\[
\mathrm{obs} \in \ext^2(N\dual[1], \OO) = \Ext^1(N\dual, \OO) = H^1(N)
.\]
and similarly $\mathrm{def} = H^0(N)$ and $\aut = 0$.
For $X \mapsvia{f} Y$, we can think of this as an embedded deformation of $\Gamma \subset X \cross Y$, in which case $N\dual = F^* \Omega_{Y_{/k}}$.
Then $\mathrm{obs}, \mathrm{def} \in H^{1, 0}(f^* T_{X_{/k}})$ respectively and $\aut = 0$.
There is an exact triangle
\[
f^* L_{Y_{/k}} \to L_{X_{/k}} \to L_{X/Y} \to f^* L_{Y_{/k}}[1]
.\]

## T1 Lifting

This will give a criterion for a pro-representable functor to be smooth.
We've seen a condition on $F$ with obstruction theory for the hull to be smooth, namely $\mathrm{obs}(F) = 0$.
However, often $F = h_{R}$ will have $R$ smooth with a natural obstruction theory for which $\mathrm{obs}(F) \neq 0$.


:::{.example title="?"}
For $X_{/k}$ smooth projective, the picard functor $\pic_{X_{/k}}$ is smooth because we know it's an abelian variety.
We also know that the natural obstruction space is $\mathrm{obs} = H^2(\OO_{X})$, which may be nonzero.
We could also have abstract deformations given by $H^2(T_{X})$

Given $A \in \Art_{/k}$ and $M$ a finite length $A\dash$module, we can form the ring $A \oplus M$ where $M$ is square zero and $A\actson M$ by the module structure.
This yields
\[
0 \to M \to A \oplus M \to A \to 0
\]

The explicit ring structure is given by $(x, y) \cdot (x, y') = (xx', x'y + xy')$.
:::



:::{.proposition title="Characterization of Smoothness"}
Assume $\ch k =0$ and $F$ is a pro-representable deformation functor, so $F = \hom(R, \cdot)$ where $R$ is a complete local $k\dash$algebra with $\dim t_{R} < \infty$.

Then $R$ is smooth[^smoothness_reminder]
over $k$
$\iff$ 
for all $A\in \Art_{/k}$ and all $M, M' \in A\dash\text{mod}$ finite dimensional with $M \surjects M'$, we have

\[
F(A\oplus M) \surjects F(A\oplus M')
.\]


[^smoothness_reminder]: 
I.e. $R \cong k[[t_{R}\dual]]$.

:::

### Proof of Proposition 


:::{.observation}
First observe that $\ker(F(A\oplus M) \to F(A)) = \ker(\hom(R, A\oplus M) \to \hom(R, A))$, note that if we have two morphisms 

\begin{tikzcd}
R 
  \ar[r] 
& 
R
  \ar[r, shift left=0.75ex, "g \oplus g"] 
  \ar[r, shift right=0.75ex, "f \oplus g'"'] 
& 
A \oplus M
\end{tikzcd}

denoting these maps $h, h'$ we have

1. $g-g' \in \Der_{k}(R, M)$, since 
\[
(h-h')(x, y) 
&= h(x)h(y) - h'(x) h'(y) \\
&= (f(x)f(y), f(x)g(y) + f(y)g(x) )  - (f(x)f(y), f(x) g'(y) + f(y) g'(x)) \\
&= f(x)(g-g')(y) + f(y)(g-g')(x)
.\]

2. Given $g: R\to A\oplus M$ and $\theta \in \Der_{k}(R, M)$, then $g + \theta: R \to A\oplus M$.

:::

We conclude that the fibers are naturally torsors for $\Der_{k}(R, M)$ if nonempty.
It is in fact a canonically trivial torsor, since there is a distinguished element in each fiber.
Thus to show the following,
it is enough to show surjection on fibers and trivial extensions go to trivial ones, then $\Der_{k}(R, M) \to \Der_{k}(R, M')$ with $0\mapsto 0$.

\begin{tikzcd}
F(A\oplus M) 
  \ar[rr]
  \ar[rd]
& 
& F(A\oplus M') 
  \ar[ld]
\\
& F(A) 
&
\end{tikzcd}

The criterion for $F$ being surjective is equivalent to 
\[
\Der_{k}(R, M) &\surjects \Der_{k}(R, M') \\ \\
&\Downarrow \qquad \text{identified as }\\ \\
\hom_{R}(\Omega_{R_{/k}}, M) &\surjects \hom(\Omega_{R_{/k}'}, M')
.\]

:::{.warnings}
$\Omega_{R_{/k}}$ is complicated.
An example is 
\[
\Omega_{k[[x]]/k} \tensor k((x)) = \Omega_{k((x))/k}
.\]
which is an infinite dimensional $k((x))$ vector space.
:::

Here we only need to consider the completions $\hom_{R}(\hat \Omega_{R_{/k}}, M) \surjects \hom(\hat \Omega_{R_{/k}'}, M') = k[[x]]~dx$.


:::{.fact}
In characteristic zero, $R?k$ is smooth iff $\hat \Omega_{R_{/k}}$ is free.
:::
  
Thus the surjectivity condition is equivalent to checking that $\hom(\hat \Omega_{R_{/k}}, \wait)$ is right-exact on finite length modules.
This happens iff $\hat \Omega$ are projective iff they are free.


:::{.fact title="from algebra"}
Uses an algebra fact: for a complete finitely-generated module $M$ over a complete ring, then $M$ is free if $M$ projective with respect to sequences of finite-length modules.
Over a local ring, finitely-generated and projective implies free.
:::


:::{.remark}
This is powerful -- allows showing deformations of Calabi-Yaus are unobstructed!
:::


:::{.definition title="Calabi-Yau"}
A smooth projective $X_{/k}$ is **Calabi-Yau** iff
\[
\omega_{x} \cong \OO_{x}
,\]
i.e. the canonical bundle is trivial.
:::




:::{.proposition title="?"}
$X_{/k}$ CY with $H^0(T_{X}) = 0$ (implying that the deformation functor $F$ of $X$ is pro-representable, say by $R$, and has no infinitesimal automorphisms) has unobstructed deformations, i.e. $R$ is smooth of dimension $H^1(T_{X})$.

:::

Note that $H^2(T_{X}) \neq 0$ in general, so this is a finer criterion.


:::{.example title="?"}
Take $X \subset \PP^4$ a smooth quintic threefold.

- By adjunction, this is Calabi-Yau since
\[
\omega_{x} = \omega_{\PP^4}(5) \mid_{X} = \OO_{x}
.\]

- By Lefschetz,
\[
H^i_\mathrm{sing} (\PP^4, \CC) 
&\mapsvia{\cong} 
H^i_{\mathrm{sing}}(X, \CC)
&& \text{except in middle dimension} \\ \\
&\Downarrow \quad \text{ implies} \\ \\
H^{3, 1} 
&= H^{1, 3} = 0
.\]

- By Serre duality,
\[
H^0(T_{x}) &= 0 \cong H^4(\Omega_{x} \tensor \omega_{x}) \\ \\
&\Downarrow \quad\text{implies} \\ \\
H^3(\Omega_{x}) &= H^{3, 1} = 0
.\]

:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
There are nontrivial embedded deformations that yield the same abstract deformations, write them down for the quintic threefold.
:::

:::{.claim}
The abstract moduli space here is given by $\PGL(5) \sm \hilb$ where $\hilb$ is smooth.
:::

### Proof that obstructions to deformations of Calabi-Yaus are unobstructed

We need to show that for any $M \surjects M'$ that
\[
F(A\oplus M) \surjects F(A\oplus M')
.\]
The fibers of the LHS are extensions from $A$ to $A\oplus M$, and the RHS are extensions of $X/A$?
By dualizing, we need to show $H^1(T_{X/A}\tensor M ) \surjects H^1(T_{X/A} \tensor M')$ since the LHS is $\ext^1(\Omega_{X/A}, M)$.
We want the bottom map here to be surjective:

\begin{tikzcd}
  X  
  \ar[d]
& X' 
  \ar[d] 
\\
  \spec A 
  \ar[r, hook] 
& \spec A \oplus M
\end{tikzcd}


:::{.fact title="Important"}
For $X/A$ a deformation of a CY, $H^*(T_{X/A})$ is free.
This will finish the proof, since the map is given by $H^1(T_{X/A}) \tensor M \surjects H^1(T_{X/A}) \tensor M'$ by exactness.
This uses the fact that there's a spectral sequence
\[
\Tor_{q}(H^p(T_{X/A}), M) \implies H^{p+q} (T_{X/A} \tensor M)
\]
which follows from base change and uses the fact that $T_{X/A}$ is flat.
:::


We'll be looking at $\Tor_{1}(H^0(T_{X/A}), M)$ which is zero by freeness.
Hodge theory is now used: by Deligne-Illusie, for $X\mapsvia{f} S$ smooth projective, taking pushforwards $R^p f_* \Omega^q_{X_{/S}}$ are free (coming from degeneration of Hodge to de Rham) and commutes with base change.


:::{.remark}
This implies that $\omega_{X/A} = \OO_{X}$ is trivial.
Using Deligne-Illusie, since $\omega$ is trivial on the special fiber, $H^0(\omega_{X/A}) = A$ is free of rank 1.
We thus have a section $\OO_{X} \to \omega_{X/A}$ which is an isomorphism by flatness, since it's an isomorphism on the special fiber.
:::


:::{.remark}
By Serre duality, $H^1(T_{X/A}) = H^{n-1}(\Omega_{X/A} \tensor \omega_{X/A}) \dual = H^{n-1}(\Omega_{X/A})\dual$, which is free by Deligne-Illusie.
  This also holds for $H^0(T_{X/A}) = H^n(\Omega_{X/A})\dual$ is free.
:::

Thus deformations of Calabi-Yaus are unobstructed.

### Remarks

:::{.remark}
In fact we need much less.
Take $A_{n} = k[t] / t^n$, then consider

\begin{tikzcd}
0
  \ar[r]
& A_n   
  \ar[r]
& A_n[\eps]
  \ar[r]
& A_n \\
0
  \ar[r]
  \ar[u, equal]
& A_n   
  \ar[r]
  \ar[u, equal]
& A_n \oplus \eps A_n
  \ar[r]
  \ar[u, equal]
& A_n 
  \ar[u, equal]
\end{tikzcd}

For a deformation $X/A_{n}$, let $T^1(X/A_{n}) = \ker(F(A_{n}[\eps]) \to F(A_{n}) )$, the fiber above $X/A_{n}$.
Then Kuramata shows that one only needs to show surjectivity for these kinds of extensions, which is quite a bit less.
:::

In the T1 lifting theorem, the condition is equivalent to the following:
For any deformation $X/A_{n+1}$, there is a map
\[
T^1(X/A_{n+1}) \to T^1(X\tensor A_{n} / A_{n})
.\]
and surjectivity is equivalent to the lifting condition.
In the CY situation, the extension group $T^1(X/A_{n+1}) =  H^1(T_{X/A_{n+1}})$ and the RHS is $H^1(T_{X\tensor A_{n} / A_{n}})$.
So the slogan for the T1 lifting property is the following:

:::{.slogan}
If the deformation space is free and commutes with base change, then deformations are unobstructed.
:::

Commuting with base change means the RHS is $H^1(T_{X/A_{n}}) \tensor A_{n}$, so we just need to show it's free?
