# Monday April 27th

## Principle of Galois Cohomology

Let $\ell_{/k}$ a galois extension and $X_{/k}$ some "object" for which it makes sense to associate another object over $\ell$.
We'll prove that there's a correspondence
\[
\correspond{
\ell_{/k}, \text{ twisted forms} \\
Y \text{ of } X_{/k}
}
&\mapstofrom
H^1(\ell_{/k}, \aut(X_{/\ell}))
.\]



Recall that $\PGL(n ,\ell) \da \GL(n ,\ell) / \ell\units$.

:::{.example title="?"}
Let $X = \PP^{n-1}/k$, then $H^1(\ell_{/k}, \PGL(n, \ell)$ parameterizes twisted forms of $\PP^{n-1}$, e.g. for $n=2$ twisted forms of $\PP^1$ and plane curves.
:::


:::{.example title="?"}
Take $X = M_{n}(k)$ the algebra of $n\times n$ matrices.
Then by a theorem (Skolern-Noether) $\aut(M_{n}(k)) = \PGL(n, k)$.
Thus $H^1(\ell_{/k}, \PGL(n, k))$ also parameterizes twisted forms of $M_{n}(k)$ in the category of unital (not necessarily commutative) $k\dash$algebras.
These are exactly central simple algebras $A_{/k}$ where $\dim_{k} A = n^2$ with center $Z(A) = k$ with no nontrivial two-sided ideals.
By taking \(\ell = k^{s} \), we get a correspondence
\[
\correspond{\text{CSAs} A_{/k} \text{ of degree } n} 
&\mapstofrom
\correspond{\text{ Severi-Brauer varieties of dimension n-1} }
.\]
Taking $n=2$ we obtain
\[
\correspond{\text{Quaternion algebras } A_{/k}} 
&\mapstofrom
\correspond{\text{Genus 0 curves } \ell_{/k}}
.\]

:::

## The Weil Descent Criterion

Fix $\ell_{/k}$ finite Galois with $g \da \aut(\ell_{/k})$.

1. $X_{/k} \to X_{/\ell}$ with a $g\dash$action.

2. What additional data on an $\ell\dash$variety $Y_{/\ell}$ do we need in order to "descend the base" from $\ell$ to $k$?

For $\sigma \in g$, write $\ell^\sigma$ to denote $\ell$ given the structure of an $\ell\dash$algebra via $\sigma: \ell \to \ell^\sigma$.
If $X_{/\ell}$ is a variety, so is $X^\sigma_{/\ell}$?

\begin{tikzcd}
X^\sigma\ar[dr, dotted] \ar[r]\ar[d] & X \ar[d] \\
\spec \ell^\sigma \ar[r, "f"] & \spec \ell
\end{tikzcd}


where $f$ is the map induced on $\spec$ by $\sigma$.
We can also think of these on defining equations:
\[
X     &= \spec \ell[t_{1}, \cdots, t_{n}] / \gens{p_{1}, \cdots, p^n} \\
X^\sigma &= \spec \ell[t_{1}, \cdots, t_{n}] / \gens{\sigma_{p_{1}}, \cdots, \sigma{p^n}} \\
.\]

For $X_{/k}, X_{/\ell}$, we canonically identify $X$ with $X^\sigma$ by the map $f_\sigma: X \mapsvia{\cong} X^\sigma$, a canonical isomorphism of $\ell\dash$varieties.
We thus have

\begin{tikzcd}
X \ar[r, "f_\sigma"] \ar[rr, bend left, "f_{\sigma \tau}"] & X^\sigma \ar[r, "f_\sigma"] & X^{\sigma \tau}
\end{tikzcd}


under a "cocycle condition" $f_{\sigma \tau} = {}^\sigma f_\tau \circ f_\sigma$.


:::{.theorem title="Weil"}
Given $Y_{/\ell}$ quasi-projective and $\forall \sigma \in g$ we have descent datum $f_\sigma: Y\mapsvia{\cong} Y^\sigma$ satisfying the above cocycle condition, and there exists a unique $X_{/k}$ such that $X_{/\ell} \mapsvia{\cong} Y_{/\ell}$ and the descent data coincide.
:::


### An Application

Let $X_{/k}$ be a quasiprojective variety and $Y_{/k}$ and $\ell_{/k}$ twisted forms.
Then $a_{0} \in Z' (\ell_{/k}, \aut X)$.
Conversely, we have the following:

:::{.definition title="Twisted Descent Data"}
Let $a_{0}$ be such a cocycle and $\theset{s_\sigma: X\to X^\sigma}$ be descent datum attached to $X$.
Define twisted descent datum $g_\sigma \da f_\sigma \circ a_\sigma$ from
\[
X /\ell\mapsvia{a_\sigma} X_{/\ell} \mapsvia{f_\sigma} X^\sigma / \ell
.\]
:::


:::{.exercise title="?"}
Check that $g_\sigma$ satisfies the cocycle condition, so by Weil uniquely determines a ($k\dash$model) $Y_{/k}$ of $X_{/\ell}$.
:::



:::{.example title="?"}
Let $G_{/k}$ be a smooth algebraic group and $X_{/k}$ a torsor under $G$.
Then $\Aut(G) \supset \aut_{G\dash\text{torsor}} (G) = G$, since in general the translations will only be a subgroup of the full group of automorphisms.
Then
\[
H^1(\ell_{/k}, G) \to H^1(\ell_{/k}, \aut G)
\]
defines a twisted form $X$ of $G$.
How do you descend the torsor structure? 
This is possible, but not covered in Bjoern's book!
This requires expressing the descent data more functorially -- see the book on Neron models.
:::

## The Cohomology Theory

### Motivation

Let $G_{/k}$ be a smooth connected commutative algebraic group where $\ch k$ does not divide $n$, so the map $[n]: G \to G$ is an isogeny.
Then
\[
0 \to G[n] (k^{s} ) \to G(k^{s} ) \mapsvia{[n]} G(k^{s} ) \to 0
\]
is a SES of $g = \aut(k^{s}_{/k})\dash$modules.

:::{.claim}
Taking the associated cohomology sequence yields the Kummer sequence:
\[
0 \to G(k) / nG(k) \to H^1(k, G[n]) \to H^1(k, G)[n] \to 0
\]
where the RHS is the **Weil–Châtelet** group and the LHS is the **Mordell-Weil** group.
:::

For $g$ a profinite group, a commutative discrete $g\dash$group is by definition a $g\dash$module.
These form an abelian category with enough injectives, so we can take right-derived functors of left-exact functors.
We will consider the functor 
$$
A \mapsto A^g \da \theset{x\in A \suchthat \sigma x = x ~\forall \sigma\in g}
,$$
then define $H^i(g, A)$ to be the $i$th right-derived functor of $A \mapsto A^\sigma$.
This is abstractly defined by taking an injective resolution, applying the functor, then taking cohomology.
A concrete description is given by $C^n(g, A) = \Map(g^n, A)$ with
\[
d: C^n(g, A) &\to C^{n+1}(g, A) \\
(df)(\sigma_{1}, \cdots, \sigma_{n+1} 
&\da 
\sigma_{1} f(\sigma_{2}, \cdots, \sigma_{n+1}) \\
&\qquad + \sum_{i=1}^n (-1) f(\sigma _1, \cdots, \sigma_{i-1}, \sigma_{i}, \sigma_{i+1}, \cdots, \sigma_{n+1}) \\
&\qquad + (-1)^{n+1} f(\sigma_{1}, \cdots, \sigma_{n})
.\]
Then $d^2 = 0$, $H^n$ is kernels mod images, and this agrees with $H^1$ as defined before with $H^0 = A^g$.
We'll see that that
\[
H^i(g, A) = \directlim_{U} G^i(g/U, A^U)
.\]
If $g$ is finite, $A$ is a $g\dash$module $\iff$ $A$ is a $\ZZ[g]\dash$module, and thus
\[
A^g = \hom_{\ZZ[g]\dash\text{mod}}(\ZZ, A)
.\]
where $\ZZ$ is equipped with a trivial $g\dash$action.
We can thus think of 
\[
H^i(g, A) = \ext^i_{\ZZ[g]}(\ZZ, A)
.\]

> The end!

