# Tuesday March 3rd

:::{.definition title="Exactness of a deformation/obstruction theory"}
Introducing some nonstandard terminology:
For vector spaces $V, W\in \Vect_{/k}$, and sets $S', S$, consider a diagram of the following form:

\begin{tikzcd}
	&&& {} \\
	V & {\actson_\mu} & {S'} && S && {W \ni 0} && {} \\
	\\
	&&&& {}
	\arrow["\pi", from=2-3, to=2-5]
	\arrow["\Obs", from=2-5, to=2-7]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsOCxbMiwxLCJTJyJdLFsxLDEsIlxcYWN0c29uX1xcbXUiXSxbNCwxLCJTIl0sWzQsM10sWzYsMSwiVyBcXG5pIDAiXSxbOCwxXSxbMywwXSxbMCwxLCJWIl0sWzAsMiwiXFxwaSJdLFsyLDQsIlxcT2JzIl1d)


This will mean:

- $\pi$ is a map of sets
- $\mu$ is an action of $V$ (as a group) on $S'$

This sequence is *exact*:

- At $S$ iff $\text{obs}\inv(0) = \pi(S')$
- At $S'$ iff $\mu$ preserves fibers and acts transitively on them
- At $V$ iff $\mu$ is faithful.

Note that in the category of abelian groups, this is the usual notion of exactness.


:::

:::{.definition title="Obstruction theory"}
Let $F: \Art/k \to \Sets$ be a deformation functor.
An *obstruction theory* for $F$ consists of

- Two finite-dimensional vector spaces called $\text{Def}, \text{Obs}$
- For any small thickening $A' \to A$ a functorial diagram of the form

\begin{tikzcd}
	\Def & \actson & {F(A')} && {F(A)} && \Obs
	\arrow["{F(\pi)}", from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow["\Obs", from=1-5, to=1-7]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNSxbMCwwLCJcXERlZiJdLFsxLDAsIlxcYWN0c29uIl0sWzIsMCwiRihBJykiXSxbNCwwLCJGKEEpIl0sWzYsMCwiXFxPYnMiXSxbMiwzLCJGKFxccGkpIl0sWzMsNCwiXFxvYnMiXV0=)

which is

- Exact at $F(A')$ and $F(A)$.
- $(A' \to A) = (k[\eps] \to k)$ is exact at $\text{Def}$.

:::

:::{.example title="?"}
If $L_0$ is a line bundle on $X_{/k}$ projective connected $k\dash$algebraically closed, we have a Picard functor $F(A)$ sending $A$ to isomorphism classes of line bundles $L$ on $X_A$ (base change to $A$) with $L \tensor k \cong L_0$.
This has an obstruction theory given by

\[
\text{Def} &= H^1(X, \OO_X) \\
\text{Obs} &= H^2(X, \OO_X)
.\]


:::

:::{.remark}
Having an obstruction theory places some non-trivial restrictions on the deformation functor.

1. If $F$ has an obstruction theory, then $\text{Def}$ is canonically determined and equal to the tangent functor $t_F \definedas F(k[\eps])$. 
  Why? 
  Plug in $(A' \to A) = (k[\eps] \to k)$ to get a sequence 
  \[
  \text{Def} \actson F(k[\eps]) \to F(k) = \pt \to \text{Obs}
  .\]
  Since $\text{Def} \to F(k) \to F(k) \to \text{Obs}$ is exact, this forces $F(k) \mapsvia{0} \text{Obs}$, and since $\text{Def}$ acts faithfully and transitively we can identify $\text{Def} \cong F(k[\eps])$ with the map $0 \mapsto \text{triv}$ where $\text{triv}: F(k) \to F(k[\eps])$ is the vertical map.

2. If $F$ is a deformation functor with 
\begin{align}
\label{eq:starstar}
F(k[\eps] \cross_K k[\eps]) \to F(k[\eps]) \cross_{F(k)} F(k[\eps])
,\end{align}
  which is the natural map induced by projections $k[\eps] \to k$, then $t_F$ is canonically a vector space. 
:::

:::{.remark}
Where does the addition come from? 
We need a map $F(k[\eps])^2 \selfmap$; we have a map $F(k[\eps_1, \eps_2]) \to F(k[\eps])$ with $\eps_i \mapsto \eps$.
Since the domains are identified by hypothesis, this yields the addition map.

:::

:::{.remark}
Where does the scalar multiplication come from?
We need a map $k[\eps] \selfmap$ where $\eps \mapsto \lambda \eps$, which just comes from a map $F(k[\eps])\selfmap$.
:::

> See vector space objects in categories.

:::{.exercise title="?"}
In any obstruction theory, \cref{eq:starstar} is an isomorphism, and the induced structures on $t_F$ are the same.

Use the fact that there is a commuting diagram

\begin{tikzcd}
\text{Def} & \selfmap & {F(k[\eps_1, \eps_2])} & \to  & {F(k[\eps_1])} & \to  & \text{Obs} \\
          &          & \up                    &      & \up            &      &            \\
\text{Def} & \selfmap & {F(k[\eps_1])}         & \to  & {F(k[\eps_1])} & \to  & \text{Obs}
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://tikzcd.yichuanshen.de/#N4Igdg9gJgpgziAXAbVABwnAlgFyxMJZABgBpiBdUkANwEMAbAVxiRAB12cYAPHYACIwAZgF8Qo0uky58hFAEZyVWoxZtOcGA2EBbOmglSQGbHgJEATMur1mrRCABiACgDWyTjDRwA+koACLx9fSwoASiNpMzkiAGYbVXsNLggAqJMZc3lkABZEu3VHVw9gvwUIjNNZCxQAVgK1Bw5U9MlompyANkbkx05uPmAAeQAjOHF2zJja5B6w2yaUwf4xiaqs2JR8haSi53dPdm9yyqnq7KIG3cLmgbSNmZzrG6Xiw7L-M+MLreQlV59FpaHT6QznTazMiA-YDXj8IRiR6deKkGF3VrIy4oawVRZAzhMcE-SE5fJ4vYYokSFQwKAAc3gRAooiAA)


This implies \cref{eq:starstar}.
:::

:::{.remark}
What's special here is the existence of *sections*, i.e. a gluing 
\[
F(A\fiberprod{k} A') \mapsvia{\sim} F(A) \cross F(A')
.\]
:::

:::{.remark title="3"}
If $F$ has an obstruction theory, the tangent space $t_F$ is additionally finite-dimensional.
:::

:::{.remark title="4"}
$\text{Obs}$ is *not* canonically determined, and is thus not intrinsic to $F$.
This works because we can just embed any $\text{Obs} \injects \text{Obs}'$ a bigger vector space and compose.
    
Recall that $H^2(X, \OO_X)$ may not be trivial but all obstructions vanish -- in this case, we can replace $\text{Obs}$ with $0$ to get a new theory.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Suppose $F$ is pro-representable, so $F = h_R = \hom(R, \wait)$ where $R$ is a complete local ring?

1. 
Let $R = k\fps{V} = k\fps{x_1, \cdots, x_n}$ for a fixed vector space $V$, i.e. formal power series.
The extension problem for $F$ is as follows:
suppose we have a small thickening $J \to A' \to A$ of $A$, where we note $J \cong k$ as an $A'\dash$module.
We want to understand $F(A') \to F(A)$, and we're asking when $R\mapsvia{f} A$ can be lifted to $R\mapsvia{f'} A'$.

For this $R$, the lifting always exists. What is the ambiguity in the lift?
Suppose $f_1', f_2'$ are two lifts, then $f_1' - f_2': R\to J$, and we can restrict to the maximal ideal to get $\mfm_R \to J$,
Then since $J$ is nilpotent (?), $\mfm_R^2 \to 0$, so 
\[
f_1' -f_2'\in \hom_k(\mfm_R/\mfm_R^2, J) = (\mfm_R/\mfm_R^2)\dual
.\]
Further, given $\theta: (\mfm_R/\mfm_R^2) \to k$ and any lift $f'$, $f' + \theta$ is another lift.
This uses the fact that any map $R \to A'$ is determined by the image of $\mfm_R/\mfm_R^2$.

Thus there is an exact sequence 
\[
(\mfm_R/\mfm_R^2)\dual \selfmap F(A') \to F(A) \to 0
\]
is exact, even on the left (which we don't necessarily require).
The obstruction space is thus $(\mfm_R/mfm_R^2)\dual$, which is the tangent space of $F$.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Suppose $R$ is a complete Noetherian $k\dash$algebra with residue field $k$.
Then there exists a non-canonical surjection $k\fps{ \mfm_R/\mfm_R^2} \surjects R$, so $R$ is a quotient of a power series ring.
Denote $S = \mfm_R/\mfm_R^2$, and note that $t_{h_R} = t_R$ is finite dimensional since $\mfm_R$ is finitely generated.

Take an arbitrary set of generators $x_1, \cdots x_n$ of $\mfm_R$, this determines a map $k[\mfm_R/\mfm_R^2] \to R$, which we can complete to obtain a map $k\fps{ \mfm_R/\mfm_R^2} \to R$.
Since the maximal ideal is nilpotent, this induces a surjection $S/\mfm_R^n \surjects R/\mfm_R^n$.
As it turns out, there is a canonical map on tangent spaces.

See diagram.
:::

:::{.claim}
The following is exact at the first 3 places:
$$
(\mfm_R/\mfm_R^2)\dual \actson F(A') \to F(A) \to (I/\mfm_S I)\dual
$$
where $\Obs: f\mapsto \restrictionof{g}{I}$ is an obstruction map.
:::

:::{.remark}
Observe that this doesn't depend on $g$, and any other $g'$ differs by an element of $\hom_k(\mfm_S/\mfm_S^2, J)$.
$I\subset \mfm_S^2$ since $S \to R$ is an isomorphism on tangent spaces.
So $\restrictionof{g}{I} = \restrictionof{g'}{I}$.
Thus clearly $\restrictionof{g}{I} = 0 \iff f$ lifts.
:::

:::{.exercise title="Important"}
Show exactness, i.e. that any two lifts $f_1', f_2'$ differ by an element of $(\mfm_R/\mfm_R^2)\dual$ and any $f' + \theta$ is a lift, and by faithfulness these $\theta$s are different.
:::

:::{.remark}
The conclusion:
any pro-representable functor representable by a Noetherian thing (?) has a constructible obstruction theory.
We'll show that having an obstruction theory is equivalent to being *weakly* pro-representable, for which there's another condition to check for full pro-representability.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
$X_{/k}$ projective, $Z_0 \in \hilb_{X_{/k}}(k)$, then consider $F(A)$ is closed subschemes, flat over $A$, where base-changing to $k$ yields $Z_0$, i.e. $Z\subset X_A,~ Z\tensor k = Z_0$.
:::

:::{.claim}
This has an obstruction theory with $\text{Def} = \hom_{\OO_X}(I_Z, \OO_Z)$ and $\text{Obs} = \ext_{\OO_XX}^1 (I_Z, \OO_Z)$.
:::

:::{.remark}
How does this work? 
We want to understand 
\[
\text{Def} \actson F(A') \to F(A) \to \text{Obs}
.\]
Start with a $z\in F(A)$

See diagrams.

There is then a SES $0 \to \OO_{Z_0} \to \ker \psi/\im \phi = E \to I_Z \to 0$.
:::

:::{.claim}
Splittings of this SES correspond to extensions of $Z$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
We construct the maps in the correspondence directly.
For the forward direction, send 
\[
\alpha \mapsto I_{Z'} = \theset{f\in \OO_{Z'} \st f \mod{ \im(\phi) } \in \im(\alpha) }
.\]
For the reverse, for any $Z'$, we get a copy of $I_{Z'} / I_{Z_0} \subset E$.
But by exactness in the left column, this equals $I_Z$, so there's a copy sitting in $E$ isomorphically and projecting yields the identity.
In other words, for the forward direction, send $I_Z$ to $I_{Z'}$, the pre image of $I_Z$ in $\ker \psi$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Next time: showing the deformation space is zero-dimensional will yield smoothness of the Hilbert scheme.
We'll define abstract deformations of smooth $X_{/k}$ where 
\[
\text{Def} &= H^1(X, T_X)\\
\text{Obs} &= H^2(X, T_X)
.\]
:::
