# Thursday January 16th

## Subfunctors

:::{.definition title="Open Functors"}
A functor $F' \subset F: (\Sch_{/S})\op \to \Set$ is **open** iff for all $T \mapsvia{\xi} F$ where $T = h_T$ and $\xi \in F(T)$.
:::

We can take fiber products:
\begin{tikzcd}
F' \ar[r] & F \\
 & \\
\parbox{3cm}{\centering $F' \cross_F T$ \\ Representable} \ar[r, "\text{Open}"] \ar[uu] & T \ar[uu]
\end{tikzcd}

So we can think of "inclusion in $F$" as being an *open condition*: for all $T_{/S}$ and $\xi \in F(T)$, there exists an open $U \subset T$ such that for all covers $f: T' \to T$, we have
$$
F(f)(\xi) = f^*(\xi) \in F'(T')
$$
iff $f$ factors through $U$.

Suppose $U \subset T$ in $\Sch/T$,  we then have
\[
h_{U/T}(T') = \begin{cases}
\emptyset & T' \to T \text{ doesn't factor } \\
\pt & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
.\]

which follows because the literal statement is $h_{U/T}(T') = \hom_T(T', U)$.
By the definition of the fiber product,
\[
(F' \cross_F T)(T') = \theset{ (a,b) \in F'(T) \cross T(T) \suchthat \xi(b) = \iota(a) \text{ in  } F(T)}
,\]
where $F' \mapsvia{\iota} F$ and $T \mapsvia{\xi} F$.
So note that the RHS diagram here is exactly given by pullbacks, since we identify sections of $F/T'$ as sections of $F$ over $T/T'$ (?).
\begin{tikzcd}
F' \ar[r, "\iota"] & F \\
 & & \\
F' \cross_F T \ar[uu] \ar[r] & T\ar[uu, "\xi"] \\
 & & \\
& & T'
\ar[uuuul, "f\circ \xi", bend right]
\ar[uul, "f"]
\end{tikzcd}

We can thus identify
\[
(F' \cross_F T)(T') = h_{U_{/S}}(T')
,\]
and so for $U \subset T$ in $\Sch_{/S}$ we have $h_{U_{/S}} \subset h_{T_{/S}}$ is the functor of maps that factor through $U$.
We just identify $h_{U_{/S}}(T') = \hom_S(T', U)$ and $h_{T_{/S}}(T') = \hom_S(T', T)$.


:::{.example title="?"}
$\GG_m, \GG_a$.
The scheme/functor $\GG_a$ represents giving a global function, $\GG_m$ represents giving an invertible function.

\begin{tikzcd}
\GG_m \ar[r] & \GG_a \\
& \\
T'
\arrow[uur, phantom, "\scalebox{1.5}{$\llcorner$}" , very near start, color=black]
\ar[uu] \ar[r] & T \ar[uu, "f \in \OO_T(T)", swap]
\end{tikzcd}

where $T' = \theset{f\neq 0}$ and $\OO_T(T)$ are global functions.
:::

## Actual Geometry: Hilbert Schemes

> The best moduli space!

:::{.warnings}
Unless otherwise stated, assume all schemes are Noetherian.
:::

We want to parameterize families of subschemes over a fixed object.
Fix $k$ a field, $X_{/k}$ a scheme; we'll parameterize subschemes of $X$.

:::{.definition title="The Hilbert Functor"}
The **Hilbert functor** is given by
\[
\Hilb_{X_{/S}}: (\Sch_{/S})^{op} \to \Set
\]
which sends $T$ to closed subschemes $Z \subset X \cross_S T \to T$ which are flat over $T$.
:::

Here **flatness** will replace the Cartier condition:

:::{.definition title="Flatness"}
For $X \mapsvia{f} Y$ and $\FF$ a coherent sheaf on $X$, $f$ is **flat** over $Y$ iff for all $x\in X$ the stalk $F_x$ is a flat $\OO_{y, f(x)}\dash$module.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that $f$ is flat if $\OO_x$ is.
Flatness corresponds to varying continuously.
Note that everything works out if we only play with finite covers.
:::

:::{.remark}
If $X_{/k}$ is projective, so $X \subset \PP^n_k$, we have line bundles $\OO_x(1) = \OO(1)$.
For any sheaf $F$ over $X$, there is a Hilbert polynomial $P_F(n) = \chi(F(n)) \in \ZZ[n]$, i.e. we twist by $\OO(1)$ $n$ times.
The cohomology of $F$ isn't changed by the pushforward into $\PP_n$ since it's a closed embedding, and so
\[
\chi(X, F) = \chi(\PP^n, i_* F) = \sum (-1)^i \dim_k H^i(\PP^n, i_* F(n))
.\]
:::

:::{.fact}
For $n \gg 0$, $\dim_k H^0 = \dim M_n$, the $n$th graded piece of $M$, which is a graded module over the homogeneous coordinate ring whose $i_*F = \tilde M$.
:::

In general, for $L$ ample of $X$ and $F$ coherent on $X$, we can define a **Hilbert polynomial**,
\[
P_F(n) = \chi(F\tensor L^n)
.\]

This is an invariant of a polarized projective variety, and in particular subschemes.
Over irreducible bases, flatness corresponds to this invariant being constant.

:::{.proposition title="?"}
For $f:X\to S$ projective, i.e. there is a factorization:


\begin{tikzcd}
X \arrow[ddr, "f"] \arrow[rr, hook] & & \PP^n \cross S \ni \OO(1) \ar[ddl] \\
& & \\
& S &
\end{tikzcd}


If $S$ is reduced, irreducible, locally Noetherian, then $f$ is flat $\iff$ $P_{\OO_{x_s}}$ is constant for all $s\in S$.
:::

:::{.remark}
To be more precise, look at the base change to $X_1$, and the pullback of the fiber? $\OO\mid_{x_i}$?
Note that we're not using the word "integral" here!
$S$ is flat $\iff$ the Hilbert polynomial over the fibers are constant.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
The zero-dimensional subschemes $Z \in \PP^n_k$, then $P_Z$ is the length of $Z$, i.e. $\dim_k(\OO_Z)$, and
$$
P_Z(n) = \chi(\OO_Z \tensor \OO(n)) = \chi(\OO_Z) = \dim_k H^0(Z; \OO_Z) = \dim_k \OO_Z(Z)
.$$

For two closed points in $\PP^2$, $P_Z = 2$.
Consider the affine chart $\AA^2 \subset \PP^2$, which is given by
$$
\spec k[x, y]/(y, x^2) \cong k[x]/(x^2)
$$
and $P_Z = 2$.
I.e. in flat families, it has to record how the tangent directions come together.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Consider the flat family $xy = 1$ (flat because it's an open embedding) over $k[x]$, here we have points running off to infinity.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Modified Characterization of Flatness for Sheaves"}
A sheaf $F$ is flat iff $P_{F_S}$ is constant.
:::
  
## Proof That Flat Sheaves Have Constant Hilbert Polynomials

Assume $S = \spec A$ for $A$ a local Noetherian domain.

:::{.lemma title="?"}
For $F$ a coherent sheaf on $X_{/A}$ is flat, we can take the cohomology via global sections $H^0(X; F(n))$.
This is an $A\dash$module, and is a free $A\dash$module for $n\gg 0$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of lemma"}
Assumed $X$ was projective, so just take $X = \PP_A^n$ and let $F$ be the pushforward.
There is a correspondence sending $F$ to its ring of homogeneous sections constructed by taking the sheaf associated to the graded module \

\[
\sum_{n\gg0} H^0( \PP_A^m; F(n) )
=
\bigoplus_{n \gg 0} H^0(\PP_A^m; F(n))
\]
and taking the associated sheaf ($Y \mapsto \tilde Y$, as per Hartshorne's notation) which is free, and thus $F$ is free. [^tilde-construction]

[^tilde-construction]: 
See tilde construction in Hartshorne, essentially amounts to localizing free tings.

Conversely, take an affine cover $U_i$ of $X$.
We can compute the cohomology using Čech cohomology, i.e. taking the Čech resolution.
We can also assume $H^i(\PP^m; F(n)) = 0$ for $n \gg 0$, and the Čech complex vanishes in high enough degree.
But then there is an exact sequence
\[
0 \to H^0(\PP^m; F(n)) \to \mathcal C^0( \underline{U}; F(n) ) \to \cdots \to C^m( \underline{U}; F(n) ) \to 0
.\]
Assuming $F$ is flat, and using the fact that flatness is a 2 out of 3 property, the images of these maps are all flat by induction from the right.
Finally, local Noetherian and finitely generated flat implies free.
:::

By the lemma, we want to show $H^0(\PP^m; F(n))$ is free for $n\gg 0$ iff the Hilbert polynomials on the fibers $P_{F_S}$ are all constant.

:::{.claim title="1"}
It suffices to show that for each point $s\in \spec A$, we have
$$
H^0(X_s; F_S(n)) = H^0(X; F(n)) \tensor k(S)
$$
for $k(S)$ the residue field, for $n\gg 0$.
:::

:::{.claim title="2"}
$P_{F_S}$ measures the rank of the LHS.
:::

:::{.proof title="of claim 2"}

$\implies$:
The dimension of RHS is constant, whereas the LHS equals $P_{F_S}(n)$.

$\impliedby$:
If the dimension of the RHS is constant, so the LHS is free.
:::

For a f.g. module over a local ring, testing if localization at closed point and generic point have the same rank.
For $M$ a finitely generated module over $A$, we find that
$$
0 \to A^n \to M \to Q
$$
is surjective after tensoring with $\mathrm{Frac}(A)$, and tensoring with $k(S)$ for a closed point, if $\dim A^n = \dim M$ then $Q = 0$.


:::{.proof title="of claim 1"}
By localizing, we can assume $s$ is a closed point.
Since $A$ is Noetherian, its ideal is f.g. and we have
$$
A^m \to A \to k(S) \to 0
.$$
We can tensor with $F$ (viewed as restricting to fiber) to obtain
$$
F(n)^m \to F(n) \to F_S(n) \to 0
.$$
Because $F$ is flat, this is still exact.
We can take $H^*(x, \wait)$, and for $n\gg 0$ only $H^0$ survives.
This is the same as tensoring with $H^0(x, F(n))$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Hilbert Polynomial Subfunctor"}
Given a polynomial $P \in \ZZ[n]$ for $X_{/S}$ projective, we define a subfunctor by picking only those with Hilbert polynomial $p$ fiberwise as $\Hilb^P_{X_{/S}} \subset \Hilb_{X_{/S}}$.
This is given by $Z \subset X \cross_S T$ with $P_{Z} = P$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Grothendieck"}
If $S$ is Noetherian and $X_{/S}$ projective, then $\Hilb_{X_{/S}}^P$ is representable by a projective $S\dash$scheme.

> See **cycle spaces** in analytic geometry.
:::
