# Thursday April 2nd

## Abstract Deformations

Let $X_0$ be smooth and consider the deformation functor
\[
F : \Art_{_{/k}} &\to \sets \\
A &\mapsto (X_{/A} , \iota)
\]
where $X$ is flat (and thus smooth) and $i$ is a closed embedding 
$i: X_0 \injects X$ with $i\tensor k$ an isomorphism. 

Then $F$ has an obstruction theory with

- $\mathrm{def}(F) = H^1(X_0, T_0)$ of the tangent bundle
- $\mathrm{obs}(F) = H^2(X_0, T_0)$.

Additionally assume $X_0$ is smooth and projective, which will force the above cohomology groups to be finite-dimensional over $k$.


:::{.remark title="Key points"}
\envlist
- All deformations of smooth affine schemes are trivial
- Automorphisms of a deformation $X/A$ which are the identity on $X_0$ are $\id + \delta$ for $\delta$ a derivation in $\Der_k(\OO_{X_0}) = \hom_{\OO_{X_0}}(\Omega_{\qty{X_0}_{_{/k}}}, \OO_{X_0})$.

> See screenshot.
:::

Suppose we have a small thickening $k \to \AA^1 \to \AA$ and $X/\AA$ with an affine cover $X_\alpha$ of $X$.
This comes with gluing information $\phi_{\alpha\beta}: X_{\alpha\beta} \to X_{\beta\alpha} = X_\alpha \intersect X_\beta$.
These maps satisfy a cocycle condition:

\begin{tikzcd}
X_{\alpha\beta} \intersect X_{\alpha\gamma} 
  \ar[rr]
  \ar[rd] 
& 
& X_{\gamma\alpha} \intersect X_{\gamma\beta}
  \ar[ld] 
\\
& X_{\beta\alpha} \intersect X_{\beta\gamma} 
&
\end{tikzcd}



:::{.question}
Can we extend this to $X'/\AA$?
:::
  
We have $X_\alpha \cong X_\alpha^\mathrm{red} \cross \AA$?
Choose $\phi'_{\alpha\beta}$ such that

\begin{tikzcd}
X'_{\alpha\beta} 
  \ar[r, "\phi'_{\alpha\beta}"] 
& X'_{\beta\alpha} = X_{\beta\alpha}^\mathrm{red} \cross \AA 
\\
X_{\alpha\beta}\ar[u, hook] 
  \ar[r, "\phi_{\alpha\beta}"] 
& X_{\beta\alpha} 
  \ar[u, hook]
\end{tikzcd}

We need $\phi'_{\alpha\beta}$ to satisfy the cocycle condition in order to glue.
We want the following map to be the identity: $(\phi'_{\alpha\gamma})\inv \phi'_{\beta\gamma} \phi'_{\alpha\beta}$.
This is an automorphism of $X'_{\alpha\beta} \intersect X'_{\alpha\beta}$ and is thus the identity in $\aut(X_{\alpha\beta} \intersect X_{\alpha\gamma})$.
So it makes sense to talk about 
\[
\delta_{\alpha\beta\gamma} 
\da 
(\phi'_{\alpha\gamma})\inv 
\phi'_{\beta\gamma} 
\phi'_{\alpha\beta} - 
\id \in 
M^0(T_{X^\mathrm{red}_{\alpha\beta\gamma}})
.\]


:::{.exercise title="?"}
In parts,

1. $\delta_{\alpha\beta\gamma}$ is a $2\dash$cocycle for $T_{X_0}$, so it has trivial boundary in terms of Cech cocycles.
  Thus $[\delta_{\alpha\beta\gamma}] \in H^2(T_{X_0})$.

2. The class $[\delta_{\alpha\beta\gamma}]$ is independent of choice of $\phi'_{\alpha\beta}$, i.e. $\phi'_{\alpha\beta} - \phi_{\alpha\beta}'' \in H^0((T_X)_{\alpha\beta})$ gives a coboundary $\eta$ and thus $\delta = \delta' + \eta$.
  This yields $\mathrm{obs}(X) \in H^2(T_{X_0})$.

3. $\mathrm{obs}(X) = 0 \iff X$ lifts to some $X'$ (i.e. a lift exists)

:::


:::{.remark}
For the sufficiency, we have $\delta_{\alpha\beta\gamma} = \bd \eta_{\alpha\beta} \in H^0(T_{X_{\alpha\beta}})$.
Let $\phi_{\alpha\beta}'' = \phi_{\alpha\beta}' - \eta_{\alpha\beta}$, the claim is that $\phi_{\alpha\beta}''$ satisfies the gluing condition.
This covers the obstruction, so now we need to show that the set of lifts is a torsor for the action of the deformation space $\mathrm{def}(F) = H^1(T_{X_0})$.
From an $X'$, we obtain $X_{\alpha\beta}' \mapsvia{\phi_{\alpha\beta}'} X_{\beta\alpha}'$ where the LHS is isomorphic to $(X_{\alpha\beta}')^\mathrm{red} \cross \AA^r$?
Given $\eta_{\alpha\beta} \in H^0(T_{X_{\alpha\beta}})$, then $\phi'_{\alpha\beta} + \eta_{\alpha\beta} = \phi_{\alpha\beta}''$ is another such identification.

:::



:::{.exercise title="?"}
In parts

1. $\bd \eta_{\alpha\beta} = 0$.
2. Given an $X'$ and 1-coboundary $\eta$, we get a new lift $X'' = X' + \eta$.
If $[\eta] = [\eta'] \in H^1(T_{X_0})$, then $X' + \eta \cong X' + \eta'$.

By construction, $(X' + \eta)_\alpha \cong (X' + \eta')_\alpha$, but these may not patch together.
However, if $[\eta] = [\eta']$ then this isomorphism can be modified by by $\eps$ defined by $\eta-\eta' = \bd \eps$, and it patches.

:::

:::{.remark}
This kind of patching is ubiquitous -- essentially patching together local obstructions to get a global one.
In general, there is a local-to-global spectral sequence that computes the obstruction space
:::


## Proving Schlessinger

### The Schlessinger Axioms

#### H1

For any two small thickenings
\[
A' &\to A \\
A'' &\to A
\]

we have a natural map
\[
F(A' \cross_A A'') \to F(A') \cross_{F(A)} F(A'')
\]
and we require that this map is surjective.
So deformations agreeing on the sub glue together.

#### H2

When $(A' \to A) = (k[\eps] \to k)$ is the trivial extension, the map in H1 is an isomorphism.

> Doing things to first order is especially simple.

#### H3

The tangent space of $F$ is given by $t_F = F(k[\eps])$, and we require that $\dim_k t_F < \infty$, which makes sense due to H2.

#### H4

If we have two equal small thickenings $(A' \to A) = (A'' \to A)$, then the map in H1 is an isomorphism.

#### H4'

For $A' \to A$ small,
\[
t_F \selfmap F(A') \to F(A)
\]
is exact in the middle and left.


:::{.remark}
Note that the existence of this action uses H2.
:::



:::{.warnings}
For $(R, \xi)$ a complete local ring and $\xi \in \hat F(R)$ a formal family, this is a hull $\iff$ miniversal, i.e. for $h_R \mapsvia{\xi} F$, this is smooth an isomorphism on tangent spaces.
:::


:::{.theorem title="1, Schlessinger"}
\envlist

a. $F$ has a miniversal family $(R, \xi)$ with $\dim t_R < \infty$, noting that $t_R = \mfm_R / \mfm_R^2$, iff H1-H3 hold.
b. $F$ has a universal family $(R, \xi)$ with $\dim t_R < \infty$ iff h1-H4 hold.
:::


:::{.theorem title="2"}
\envlist

a. $F$ having an obstruction theory implies H1-H3.
b. $F$ having a strong obstruction theory (exact on the left) is equivalent to H1-H4.
:::

Some preliminary observations:

:::{.exercise title="Easy, fun, diagram chase"}
If $F$ has an obstruction theory, then H1-H3 hold.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
An obstruction theory being exact on the left implies H4.
:::

### Example

:::{.exercise title="?"}
For $R$ a complete local $k\dash$algebra with $t_R$ finite dimensional has a strong obstruction theory.
:::

Can always find a surjection from a power series ring:
\[
S \da k[[t_R\dual]] \surjects R
\]
which yields an obstruction theory

- $\mathrm{def} = t_R$
- $\mathrm{obs} = I/\mfm_S I$

i.e., if $F$ is pro-representable, then it has a strong obstruction theory.
Suppose that $(R, \xi)$ is versal for $F$, this implies H1.
We get $F(A' \cross_A A'') \surjects F(A') \cross_{F(A)} F(A'')$
For versal, if we have $h_R \mapsvia{\xi} F$ smooth, we have



\begin{tikzcd}
& 
& 
&  h_r 
\ar[d] 
\\
h_k 
  \ar[r] 
  \ar[rrru] 
& h_A 
  \ar[r]
  \ar[rru, dotted] 
  \ar[rr, bend right, "\eta"] 
& h_{A'} 
  \ar[ur, dotted]
  \ar[r] 
& F
\end{tikzcd}


and we can find a lift from $h_{A''}$ as well, so we get a diagram

\begin{tikzcd}
& 
& 
F
\\
h_{A''} 
  \ar[r] 
& h_R 
\ar[ru] 
\\
h_A 
  \ar[u] 
  \ar[r] 
& h_{A'} 
  \ar[u]
\end{tikzcd}


and thus

\begin{tikzcd}
  {A''} \ar[r] 
& R 
\\
A 
  \ar[u] 
  \ar[r] 
& {A'} 
  \ar[u]
\end{tikzcd}

So we get the left $\tilde \eta$ of $(\eta', \eta'')$ we want from

\begin{tikzcd}
h_{A' \cross_A A''} 
  \ar[r, "f"] 
  \ar[rr, "\tilde\eta", bend right] 
& h_R 
  \ar[r] 
& F
\end{tikzcd}


If $(R, \xi)$ is miniversal, then H2 holds.
We want to show that the map
\[
F(A'' \cross_K k[\eps]) \mapsvia{\sim} ??
\]
is a bijection.

Suppose we have two maps


\begin{tikzcd}
&  
& h_R 
\\
h_{A''} 
  \ar[rru, bend left] 
  \ar[r] 
& h_{A'' \cross k[\eps]} 
  \ar[ru, shift left=0.75ex] 
  \ar[ru, shift right=0.75ex] 
  \ar[r, shift left=0.75ex] 
  \ar[r, shift right=0.75ex] 
& F 
\\
& h_{k[\eps]} 
  \ar[ur, bend right] 
&
\end{tikzcd}

Then the two lifts are in fact equal, and

\begin{tikzcd}
R 
  \ar[r, shift left=0.75ex] 
  \ar[r, shift right=0.75ex] 
& A'' \cross k[\eps]
  \ar[r]
  \ar[d] 
& k[\eps] 
\\
& A'' 
&
\end{tikzcd}

If $(R, \xi)$ is miniversal with $t_R$ finite dimensional, then H3 holds immediately.
If $(R, \xi)$ is universal, then H4 holds.


:::{.question}
Why are H4 and H4' connected?
:::


:::{.answer}
Let $A' \to A$ be small, then
\[
A' \cross_A A' &= A' \cross_k k[\eps] \\
(x, y) &\mapsto ??
.\]

Using H2, we can identify $F(A; \cross_A A') \cong t_F \cross F(A')$.
We can thus define an action
\[
(\theta, \xi) &\mapsto (\theta + \xi, \xi)
.\]

If this is an isomorphism, then this action is simply transitive.
The map $\theta \mapsto \theta + \xi$ gives an isomorphism on the fiber of $F(A') \to F(A)$.
:::

> Next time we'll show the interesting part of the sufficiency proof.
