# Tuesday October 29th

## Exact Sequences

**Lemma (Short Five):**

Consider a diagram of the following form:

```{=latex}
\begin{tikzcd}
0 \arrow[r] & M \arrow[dd, "\alpha"] \arrow[r, "f"] & N \arrow[dd, "\beta"] \arrow[r, "g"] & Q \arrow[dd, "\gamma"] \arrow[r] & 0 \\
&                                       &                                      &                                  &   \\
0 \arrow[r] & M' \arrow[r, "f'"]                    & N' \arrow[r, "g'"]                   & Q' \arrow[r]                     & 0
\end{tikzcd}
```

1. $\alpha, \gamma$ monomorphisms implies $\beta$ is a monomorphism.

2. $\alpha, \gamma$ epimorphisms implies $\beta$ is an epimorphism.

3. $\alpha, \gamma$ isomorphisms implies $\beta$ is an isomorphism.

Moreover, (1) and (2) together imply (3).

*Proof:*
Exercise.

*Example proof of (2)*:
Suppose $\alpha, \gamma$ are monomorphisms.

- Let $n\in N$ with $\beta(n) = 0$, then $g' \circ \beta(n) = 0$.
- $\implies \gamma \circ g (n) = 0$.
- $\implies g(n) = 0$
- $\implies \exists m\in M$ such that $f(m) = n$
- $\implies \beta \circ f (m) = \beta(n)$
- $\implies f' \alpha(m) = \beta (n) = 0$
- $\implies \alpha(m) = 0$
- $\implies f'$ is injective, so $m=0$ and $n=f(m) = 0$.

$\qed$

**Definition:**
Two exact sequences are *isomorphic* iff in the following diagram, $f,g,h$ are all isomorphisms:

```{=latex}
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
0 \arrow[r] & M \arrow[dd, "f"] \arrow[r] & N \arrow[dd, "g"] \arrow[r] & Q \arrow[dd, "h"] \arrow[r] & 0 \\
            &                             &                             &                             &   \\
0 \arrow[r] & M \arrow[r]                 & N \arrow[r]                 & Q \arrow[r]                 & 0
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}
```

**Theorem:**
Let $0 \to M_1 \mapsvia f M_2 \mapsvia g M_3 \to 0$ be a SES.
Then TFAE:

- There exists an $R\dash$module homomorphisms $h: M_3 \to M_2$ such that $g\circ h = \id_{M_3}$.

- There exists an $R\dash$module homomorphisms $k: M_2 \to M_1$ such that $k\circ f = \id_{M_1}$.

- The sequence is isomorphic to $0 \to M_1 \to M_1 \oplus M_3 \to M_3 \to 0$.

*Proof:*
Define $\phi: M_1 \oplus M_3 \to M_2$ by $\phi(m_1 + m_2) = f(m_1) + h(m_2)$.
We need to show that the following diagram commutes:

```{=latex}
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
0 \arrow[r]    & M_1 \arrow[dd, "\id", latex'-latex',double,thin] \arrow[r] & M_1 \oplus M_3 \arrow[r]                               & M_3 \arrow[dd, "\id", latex'-latex',double,thin] \arrow[r] & 0 \\
	             &                                &                                             &                                & \\
0 \arrow[r]    & M_1 \arrow[r]                  & M_2 \arrow[uu, "\phi"'] \arrow[r] & M_3 \arrow[r]                  & 0
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}
```

We can check that
$$
(g\circ \phi)(m_1 + m_2) = g( f(m_1)) +  g(h(m_2)) = m_2 = \pi(m_1 + m_2).$$

This yields $1 \implies 3$, and $2 \implies 3$ is similar.

To see that $3 \implies 1, 2$, we attempt to define $k, h$ in the following diagram:

```{=latex}
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
0 \arrow[r] & M_1 \arrow[r] \arrow[dd, "\id", latex'-latex',double,thin] & M_1 \oplus M_3 \arrow[r] \arrow[l, "\pi_1"', bend right]    & M_3 \arrow[dd, "\id", latex'-latex',double,thin] \arrow[l, "\iota_2"', bend right] \arrow[r] & 0 \\
						&                       &                                                   &                                                                   &   \\
0 \arrow[r] & M_1 \arrow[r]                   & M_2 \arrow[r] \arrow[uu, "\phi"'] \arrow[l, "k", bend left] & M_3 \arrow[r] \arrow[l, "h", bend left] \arrow[r]                           & 0
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}
```

So define $k = \pi_1 \circ \phi\inv$ and $h = \phi \circ \iota_2$.
It can then be checked that
$$
g \circ h = g \circ \phi \circ \iota_2 = \pi_2 \circ \iota_2 = \id_{M_3}
.$$

$\qed$

## Free Modules

> Moral: A *free module* is a module with a basis.

**Definition:**
A subset $X = \theset{x_i}$ is *linearly independent* iff
$$
\sum r_i x_i = 0 \implies r_i = 0 ~\forall i
.$$

**Definition:**
A subset $X$ *spans* $M$ iff
$$
m\in M \implies m = \sum_{i=1}^n r_i x_i \quad \text{ for some }r_i \in R,~x_i \in X
.$$

**Definition:**
A subset $X$ is a basis $\iff$ it is a linearly independent spanning set.

*Example:*
$\ZZ_6$ is an abelian group and thus a $\ZZ\dash$module, but not free because $3 \actson [2] = [6] = 0$, so there are torsion elements.
This contradicts linear independence for any subset.

**Theorem (Characterization of Free Modules):**
Let $R$ be a unital ring and $M$ a unital $R\dash$module (so $1\actson m = m$).

TFAE:

- There exists a nonempty basis of $M$.

- $M = \oplus_{i\in I} R$ for some index set $I$.

- There exists a non-empty set $X$ and a map $\iota: X \injects M$ such that given $f: X \to N$ for $N$ any $R\dash$ module, $\exists! \tilde f: M \to N$ such that the following diagram commutes.

```{=latex}
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
M \arrow[rrdd, "\exists! \tilde f", dotted] &  &   \\
                                            &  &   \\
X \arrow[rr, "f"] \arrow[uu, "\iota", hook] &  & N
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}
```

**Definition:**
An $R\dash$module is *free* iff any of 1,2, or 3 hold.

*Proof of $1 \implies 2$:*

Let $X$ be a basis for $M$, then define $M \to \oplus_{x\in X} Rx$ by $\phi(m) = \sum r_i x_i$.

It can be checked that

- This is an $R\dash$module homomorphism,

- $\phi(m) = 0 \implies r_j = 0 ~\forall j \implies m = 0$, so $\phi$ is injective,

- $\phi$ is surjective, since $X$ is a spanning set.

So $M \cong \bigoplus_{x\in X} Rx$, so it only remains to show that $Rx \cong R$.
We can define the map
\begin{align*}
\pi_x: R &\to Rx \\
r &\mapsto rx
.\end{align*}

Then $\pi_x$ is onto, and is injective exactly because $X$ is a linearly independent set.
Thus $M \cong \oplus R$.

$\qed$

*Proof of $1 \implies 3$:*

Let $X$ be a basis, and suppose there are two maps $X \mapsvia{\iota} M$ and $X \mapsvia{f} M$.
Then define

\begin{align*}
\tilde f: M &\to N \\
\sum_i r_i x_i &\mapsto \sum_i r_i f(x_i)
.\end{align*}

This is clearly an $R\dash$module homomorphism, and the diagram commutes because $(\tilde f \circ \iota)(x) = f(x)$.

This is unique because $\tilde f$ is determined precisely by $f(X)$.

$\qed$

*Proof of $3 \implies 2$:*

We use the usual "2 diagram" trick to produce maps
\begin{align*}
\tilde f: M \to \bigoplus_{x\in X} R \\
\tilde g: \bigoplus_{x\in X}R \to M
.\end{align*}

Then commutativity forces
$$
\tilde f \circ \tilde g = \tilde g \circ \tilde f = \id
.$$

$\qed$

*Proof of $2 \implies 1$:*

We have $M = \oplus_{i\in I} R$ by (2).
So there exists a map
$$
\psi: \oplus_{i\in I} R \to M
,$$

so let $X \definedas \theset{\psi(1_i) \mid i\in I}$, which we claim is a basis.

To see that $X$ is a basis, suppose $\sum r_i \psi(1_i) = 0$.
Then $\psi(\sum r_i 1_i) = 0$ and thus $\sum r_i 1_i = 0$ and $r_i = 0$ for all $i$.

Checking that it's a spanning set:
Exercise.

$\qed$

**Corollary:**
Every $R\dash$module is the homomorphic image of a free module.

*Proof:*
Let $M$ be an $R\dash$module, and let $X$ be any set of generators of $R$.
Then we can make a map
$$
M \to \bigoplus_{x\in X} R
$$
and there is a map $X \injects M$, so the universal property provides a map
$$
\tilde f: \bigoplus_{x\in X} R \to M
.$$

Moreover, $\bigoplus_{x\in X} R$ is free.

$\qed$

*Examples:*

- $\ZZ_n$ is **not** a free $\ZZ\dash$module for any $n$.

- If $V$ is a vector space over a field $k$, then $V$ is a free $k\dash$module (even if $V$ is infinite dimensional).

- Every nonzero submodule of a free module over a PID is free.

**Some facts:**

Let $R = k$ be a field (or potentially a division ring).

1. Every maximal linearly independent subset is a basis for $V$.

2. Every vector space has a basis.

3. Every linearly independent set is contained in a basis

4. Every spanning set contains a basis.

5. Any two bases of a vector space have the same cardinality.


**Theorem (Invariant Dimension):**
Let $R$ be a commutative ring and $M$ a free $R\dash$module.

If $X_1, X_2$ are bases for $R$, then $\abs{X_1} = \abs{X_2}$.

Any ring satisfying this condition is said to have the **invariant dimension property**.

> Note that it's difficult to say much more about generic modules.
For example, even a finitely generated module may *not* have an invariant number of generators.
