# Tuesday October 22nd

## Certain Radical Extensions are Solvable

Recall the definition of an extension being *radical* (see above).

We say that a polynomial $f(x) \in K[x]$ is *solvable by radicals* iff its splitting field $L$ is a radical extension of $K$.

**Lemma:**
Let $F$ be a field of characteristic zero.

If $K$ is a splitting field of $f(x) = x^n - a \in F[x]$, then $\Gal(K/F)$ is a solvable group.

**Theorem:**
Let $F$ be characteristic zero, and suppose $F \leq E \leq K \leq \overline F$ be algebraic extension where $E/F$ is normal
and $K$ a radical extension of $F$. 
Moreover, suppose $[K:F] < \infty$.

Then $\Gal(E/F)$ is solvable.

*Proof:*
The claim is that $K$ is contained in some $L$ where $F \subset L$, $L$ is a finite normal radical extension, and $\Gal{L/F}$ is solvable.

Since $K$ is a radical extension of $F$, we have $F = K(\alpha_1, \cdots, \alpha_n)$ and $\alpha_i^{n_i} \in K(\alpha_1, \cdots, \alpha_{i-1})$ for each $i$ and some $n_i \in \NN$.

Let $L_1$ be the splitting field of $f_1(x) = x^{n_1} - \alpha_1^{n_1}$, then by the previous lemma, $L_1$ is a normal 
extension and $\Gal(L_1/F)$ is a solvable group.

Inductively continue this process, and letting 
$$
f_2(x) = \prod_{\sigma \in \Gal(L_1/F)} x^{n_2} - \sigma(\alpha_2)^{n_2} \in F[x]
.$$
Note that the action of the Galois group on this polynomial is stable.
Let $L_2$ be the splitting field of $f_2$, then $L_2$ is a finite normal radical extension.

Then 
$$
\frac{ \Gal(L_2/F) }{ \Gal(L_2/L_1) } \cong \Gal(L_1/F)
,$$ 
which is solvable, and the denominator in this quotient is solvable, so the total group must be solvable as well. $\qed$

## Proof: Insolubility of the Quintic

**Theorem (Insolubility of the quintic):**
Let $y_1, \cdots, y_n$ be independent transcendental elements in $\RR$, then the polynomial $f(x) = \prod (x-y_i)$ is not solvable by radicals over $\QQ(s_1, \cdots, s_n)$
where the $s_i$ are the elementary symmetric polynomials in $y_i$.

> So there are no polynomial relations between the transcendental elements.

*Proof:*

Let $n\geq 5$ and suppose $y_i$ are transcendental over $\RR$ and linearly independent over $\QQ$.
Then consider

\begin{align*}
s_1 &= \sum y_i \\
s_2 &= \sum_{i\leq j} y_i y_j \\
\cdots \\
s_n &= \prod_i y_i
.\end{align*}


Then $\QQ(y_1, \cdots, y_n)/ \QQ(s_1, \cdots, s_n)$ would be a normal extension precisely if $A_n \normal S_n$ (by previous theorem).
For $n\geq 5$, $A_n$ is simple, and thus $S_n$ is not solvable in this range.

Thus the polynomial is not solvable by radicals, since the splitting field of $f(x)$ is $\QQ(y_1, \cdots, y_n)$. $\qed$

## Rings and Modules

Recall that a ring is given by $(R, +, \cdot)$, where

1. $(R, +)$ is an abelian group,
2. $(R, \cdot)$ is a monoid,
3. The distributive laws hold.

An *ideal* is certain type of subring that allows taking quotients, and is defined by $I \normal R \iff I\leq R$ and $RI, IR \subseteq I$.
The quotient is given by $R/I = \theset{r + I \suchthat r\in R}$, and the ideal property is what makes this well-defined.

Much like groups, we have some notion of homomorphism $\phi: R\to R'$, where $\phi(ax+y) = \phi(a)\phi(x) + \phi(y)$.

### Modules

We want to combine the following two notions:

- Groups acting on sets, and

- Vector spaces

**Definition:**
Let $R$ be a ring and $M$ an abelian group. Then if there is a map 
\begin{align*}
R\cross M &\to M \\
(r,m) &\mapsto rm
.\end{align*}

such that $\forall s,r_1,r_2 \in R$ and $m_1,m_2 \in M$ we have

- $(sr_1 + r_2)(m_1 + m_2) = sr_1m_1 + sr_1m_2 + r_2m_1 + r_2 m_2$
- $1\in R \implies 1m = m$.

then $M$ is said to be an **$R\dash$module.**

> Think of $R$ like the group acting by scalar multiplication, and $M$ the set of vectors with vector addition.

*Examples:*

1. $R = k$ a field, then a $k\dash$module is a vector space.

2. $R = G$ an abelian group, then $R$ is a $\ZZ\dash$module where 
$$
n\actson a \definedas \sum_{i=1}^n a
.$$
  
  > (In fact, these two notions are equivalent.)

3. $I \normal R$, then $M \definedas R/I$ is an ring, which has an underlying abelian group, so $M$ is an $R\dash$module where 
$$
M\actson R = r\actson(s+I) \definedas (rs) + I
.$$

4. For $M$ an abelian group, $R \definedas \mathrm{End}(M) = \hom_{\text{AbGrp}}(M, M)$ is a ring, and $M$ is a left $R\dash$module given by 
$$
f\actson m \definedas f(m)
.$$

**Definition:**
Let $M, N$ be left $R\dash$modules. Then $f: M \to N$ is an $R\dash$module homomorphism $\iff$ 
$$
f(rm_1 + m_2) = rf(m_1) + f(m_2)
.$$

**Definition:**
*Monomorphisms* are injective maps, *epimorphisms* are surjections, and *isomorphisms* are both.

**Definition**:
A *submodule* $N\leq M$ is a subset that is closed under all module operations.

We can consider images, kernels, and inverse images, so we can formulate homomorphism theorems analogous to what we saw with groups/rings:

**Theorem:**

1. If $M \mapsvia{f} N$ in $R\dash$mod, then 
$$
M / \ker(f) \cong \im(f)
.$$

2. Let $M, N \leq L$, then $M+N \leq L$ as well, and 
$$
\frac{M}{M\intersect N} \cong \frac{M+N}{N}
.$$

3. If $M\leq M\leq L$, then 
$$
\frac{M}{N} \cong \frac{L/M}{L/N}
$$

> Note that we can always quotient, since there's an underlying abelian group, and thus the "normality"/ideal condition is always satisfied for submodules. 
Just consider 
$$
M/N  \definedas \theset{m + N \suchthat m\in M}
,$$ 
then $R\actson (M/N)$ in a well-defined way that gives $M/N$ the structure of an $R\dash$module as well. 
