# Thursday, June 03

## Part 1

> Jeremey Hanh, MIT: something abelian about commutative ring spectra
> See Tablbot 2017 notes and Richter's survey article "Commutative Ring Spectra".

:::{.remark}
The 2017 Talbot was on structured ring spectra, i.e. "brave new algebra", where we study $E_n\dash$ring spectra.
Getting the subject off the ground requires many definitions, care of May, EKMM, Lurie, and more.
:::

:::{.remark}
The key objects we'll be considering:

- $\SS$, the initial $E_\infty$ ring spectrum
- Thom $E_\infty$ring spectra: $\MO, \MSO, \MSp, \MStr, \MU$, and the sphere fits into this pattern as framed bordism

We construct *other* $E_\infty$ rings primarily to study these motivating examples.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
A ring spectrum that shows up naturally when ?:
 $\MU$, for which 
 \[
\pi_* \MU \cong \ZZ[x_1, x_2, \cdots]
&& \text{where } \abs{x_i} = 2i
\]
Localing at a prime $p$ splits $\MU_{(p)}$ into  sum of suspensions $\BP$ where 
\[
\pi_* \BP = \ZZ_{(p)}[x_1, x_2, \cdots]
&&
\text{where } \abs{x_i} = 2p^i - 2
.\]
We can write 
\[
\BP = \MU / \gens{x_j \st j\neq p^i - 1}
,\]
so $\BP$ has simpler homotopy, and $\MU$ splits into a sum of copies of $\BP$, which are easier to work with because the homotopy is more sparsely distributed.
$\BP$ is a bit of a "designer" spectrum, and $\MU$ is more geometric.
:::

:::{.question}
Does this splitting preserve the face that $\MU$ is an $E_\infty$ ring spectrum?
I.e. is $\BP$ an $E_\infty$ ring spectrum?
:::

:::{.answer}
No! See Lawson and Senger, who prove that $\BP$ not an $E_{2p^2 + q}\dash$ring spectrum.
It turns out that understanding the $E_4$ structure is sufficient for many applications.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Basterra, Mandell"}
$\BP$ is an $E_4\dash$algebra retract of $\MU$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Some open questions:

1. Is $\BP$ an $E_5\dash\MU\dash$algebra?
2. The $E_n$ operad acts on $\BP$, so is $\BP$ a $\Disk_2\dash$algebra?
  In particular, can one take factorization homology against unframed surfaces?
  This would correspond to a trivial $S^1\dash$action.
:::

:::{.remark}
Studying other $E_\infty$ rings naturally leads to problems in obstruction theory.
We study $\SS$ via chromatic homotopy theory.
The basic strategy:

- Resolve $\SS$ by other $E_\infty$ rings, namely the $K(n)\dash$local sphere $L_{K(n)} \SS$.
  Note that this is a Bousfield localization.
  This is useful precisely because of the chromatic convergence theorem, and one can build a tower whose associated graded are these local spheres.

- Resolve $L_{K(n)} \SS$ for a fixed $n$ by the Hopkins-Miller $\EO\dash$theories, which are $E_\infty$ rings of the form $E_n^{hG}$ for $G$ a finite group acting on the height $n$ Morava $E\dash$theory $E_n$.
  These $\EO$ theories are supposed to be the basic building blocks of the $K(n)\dash$local spheres.
  (Check)

:::

:::{.question title="A big one"}
Can one generally construct the $\EO$ localizations above?
:::

:::{.remark}
Proved for a fixed degree/height? Check.
A recent triumph of obstruction theory is that the building block $\EO$ theories have been built.
This was a prominent topic in 2017 Talbot.
:::

:::{.remark}
How one builds $\EO$ theories:

- Build $E_n$ as a homotopy commutative ring using the Landweber exact functor theorem, which is not too difficult.
- Promote the $E_n$ to $E_\infty$ rings using obstruction theory.
  - See Robinson, Goerss-Hopkins, Lurie, Pstragowki and VanKoughnett.
  These allow one to make $G\dash$actions by $E_\infty$ ring maps.
  - Rough sketch: build an $E_\infty$ ring in $\ho\Sp$ (the homotopy category of spectra), which is already a homotopy commutative ring.
    Then do this in the homotopy 2-category of $\Sp$, then the homotopy 3-category of $\Sp$, and so on.
    This uses that an $\infty\dash$category is a sequence of $n\dash$categories.
:::

:::{.question}
Can one compute $\pi_* \EO$ for $\EO \da E_n^{hG}$ for various $n$ and $G$?
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
The key to the Kervaire invariant one question is computing $\pi_* E_4 ^{hC_8}$, and captures information about diffeomorphism classes of exotic spheres.
:::

:::{.observation}
In practice, these $\EO$ theories (which are all $K(n)\dash$local) seem to be $K(n)\dash$localizations of nice connective ring spectra.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
At the prime $p=2$, $E_1^{hC_2} = \KO\localize{2}$ is the localization of $\KO$ at 2, and turns out to be equal to $L_{K(1)}(k_0)$:
It turns out that $E_2^{hC_{24}} = L_{K(2)} (\tmf)$, and so $\ko$ and $\tmf$ are "connective $E_\infty$ lifts" of $E_1^{hC_2}$ and $E_2^{hC_{24}}$.

\[
E_1^{hC_2} = \KO\localize{2} &= L_{K(1)}(\ko) \\
E_2^{hC_{24}} &= L_{K(2)}(\tmf)
.\]


:::

:::{.remark}
These lifts are closer to geometry than $\EO$ theories, e.g. there is an $E_\infty$ ring map due to Ando-Hopkins-Rezk
\[
\MString \to \tmf
.\]

> Find comments

See how $\MSpin$ splits as 
\todo[inline]{Missed}

so one might expect that $\MString$ is 

\todo[inline]{??? Missed}

:::

:::{.remark}
An observation due to Hi-Kriz and Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel: using sparsity, the easiest way to compute $\pi_* \EO$ is to compute $\pi_* \eo$ where $\eo$ is a good connective lift of $\EO$.
Note that $\pi_* \tmf$ is finitely-generated in each degree, and it's useful to work with something "small" in computations, for example if you're trying to rule out differentials in spectral sequences.
A nice way to organize the computations of $\pi_* \EO$ is to understand them via lifts with better finiteness properties.
:::

:::{.question}
Can we make connective $\eo$ theories highly structured with $L_{K(n)} \eo = \EO = E_n^{hG}$ for various and $n$ and $G$?
:::

> See example in comment

:::{.remark}
$\tmf$ is a connective $\EO$ theory, so how is $\tmf\localize{2}$ built?
For full details, see the tmf book or Lurie's "Elliptic Cohomology".
A sketch: $\tmf\localize{2} = \tau_{\geq 0} L_2 \tmf\localize{2}$ where the latter is built out of a finite resolution involving the following three terms:

- $L_{K(2)} \tmf$
- $L_{K(1)} \tmf$
- $L_{\QQ} \tmf$

Note that $L_2$ is the second stage of the chromatic tower.
The basic strategy: take the monochromatic pieces above, which are relatively easy to make and work with, and find a way to glue them together.
:::

:::{.remark}
An idea: one can try to make $\eo$ as a connective cover of some $L_n\dash$local object.
See Lawson, Berhrens-Lawson and $\TAF$ (topological automorphic forms).
This worked very well for $\tmf$, and there is currently partial progress at height 3.
We're not yet able to construct a connective  version of $E_4^{hC_8}$, which was needed in Kervaire Invariant One.

Note that all techniques used here seem to work equally well for building $E_\infty$ as $E_n$ rings for finite $n$.

> See comments

:::

:::{.remark}
An alternate idea that let Hill-Hopkins-Ravenel solve Kervaire Invariant One, and recently developed by Beaudry-Hill-Shi-Zeng, constructs a connective version of $E_4^{hC_8}$.
However, with this construction, it's less clear how much structure there is on the object.
They use the following procedure:

- Put a $C_8$ action on $\MU^{\tensor 4}$ by viewing this as a norm $\NN_{C_2}^{C_8} \MU_\RR$ 

  \todo[inline]{Check $\RR$ notation..}

  The norm here gives a way of boosting a $C_2$ action on one tensor factor to a $C_8$ action on 4 tensor factors.
- Quotient by some elements, possibly losing structure, to obtain a quotient $Q$.
  The connective version of $E_4^{hC_8}$ is $Q^{C_8}$.
  - It'd be interesting to know how much structure is lost here!
:::

:::{.question}
Some natural questions that arise here:

- What group actions (with various amounts of structure, e.g. $E_\infty$) act on tensor powers $\MU^{\tensor m}$?
- What structure exists on quotients of such tensor powers?
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that these quotients can be destructive when it comes to maintaining $E_n$ ring structures.
Answering these amounts to building structured models for these connective spectra.
Understanding these two questions would allow computing fixed points of certain Morava $E\dash$theories?
Big question: do these tensor products admit $G\dash$actions beyond those which come from norms?
:::

:::{.remark}
Getting at these $\EO$ would be huge!
The HHR construction is spectacular but somehow only works at the prime $2$ and for cyclic groups??
:::

## Part 2

:::{.remark}
Recall that $\BP$ is an $E_4$ ring spectrum with $\pi* \BP \cong \ZZ_{(p)}[x_1, x_2, \cdots]$.
What structure exists on quotients of $\BP$?
Any progress here would lead to many natural next questions, e.g. adding in group actions.
There has been recent progress, some of which is ripe for generalization -- e.g. how much can be made equivariant?
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Take 
\[
\BP \gens{ n }\da \BP / \gens{ v_n , v_{n+1}, \cdots }
\implies 
\pi_*\BP \gens{ n } \cong \ZZ_{(p)}[x_1, x_2, \cdots, x_n]
.\]
:::

:::{.theorem title="Baker-Jeanneret"}
For any choice of indecomposable generators $v_{n+1}, v_{n+2}, \cdots$, $\BP\gens{ n }$ is an $E_1\dash \BP$ algebra. 
:::

:::{.theorem title="H-Wilson"}
There exists a specific choice of generators $v_{n+1}, v_{n+2}$ is an $E_3\dash\BP$ algebra.
:::

:::{.remark}
It'd be exciting to try to take this result and use it in the equivariant setting.
We'll try to discuss a bit how this theorem is proved.
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
If $x\in \pi_{2\ell} \BP$ is any class in $\pi_* \BP$, then $\BP / \gens{ x }$ is an $E_1\dash\BP$ algebra. 
:::

:::{.remark}
This says you can freely mod out by any generator and still obtain an $E_1$ structure.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Let $S^0[a_{2\ell}] = S^0 \oplus S^{2\ell} \oplus S^{4\ell} \oplus \cdots$ denote the free $E_1$ ring on $S^{2\ell}$.
There is an $E_1$ ring map 
\[
\psi: S^0[a_{2\ell}] \to \BP
,\]
which hits $x$, and 
\[
\BP / \gens{ x } = \BP \tensor_{S^0[a_{2\ell}] } S^0 
\]
where we use $\eps: S^0[a_{2\ell}] \to S^0$.
It suffices to prove the following lemma: 

:::{.lemma title="?"}
$S^0[a_{2\ell}]$ and $\psi$ can be made $E_2$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of lemma, in the case $\ell=1$"}
Consider 
\[
S^0[a_2] = S^0 \oplus S^2 \oplus S^4 \oplus \cdots = \Free_{E_1}(S^4)
.\]
This turns out to be equal to $\Sigma_+^\infty \Loop S^3$ using ??? (see comment).
Now use $S^4 = \Loop\HP^\infty$, so this is $\Sigma_+^\infty \Omega^2 \HP^\infty$, which has an $E_2$ ring structure.

There is a filtration
\[
S^2 \to S^4\cong \HP^1 \to \HP^2 \to \HP^3 \to \cdot \to \HP^\infty
,\]
which yields a filtration
\[
\Suspendpinf \Loop^2 S^4 = \Suspendpinf \Loop^2 \HP^1 \to \Suspendpinf \Loop^2 \HP^2 \to \cdots
.\]

One can try to produce maps out of each filtered pieced:

\begin{tikzcd}
	{\Sigma_+^\infty \Omega^2 S^4} &&&& \BP \\
	\\
	{\Sigma_+^\infty \Omega^2 \HP^2} \\
	\\
	{\Sigma_+^\infty \Omega^2 \HP^3} \\
	\vdots \\
	{\Sigma_+^\infty \Omega^2 S^3}
	\arrow[from=5-1, to=6-1]
	\arrow[from=6-1, to=7-1]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-5]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=5-1]
	\arrow[curve={height=30pt}, dashed, from=3-1, to=1-5]
	\arrow[curve={height=24pt}, dashed, from=5-1, to=1-5]
	\arrow[curve={height=30pt}, dashed, from=7-1, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=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)


At each stage, the obstruction to lifting is a map out of a free $E_2$ algebra on an odd degree class in $\pi_* \BP$, which is concentrated in even degrees.

> Find comment.

:::

:::

:::{.remark}
So these are free as $E_1$ rings, and are secretly $E_2$ rings (although not free $E_2$ rings) which have a simple presentation that makes them easy to map into objects with even-degree homotopy.

> Find comment on first obstruction.

:::

:::{.remark}
Proving a relativey easy proof that introduces a new technique used to show that $\BP \gens{ n }$ can be made $E_3$. 
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
Connective $K(n)$ exists as an $E_1\dash\SS$ algebra.
:::

:::{.remark}
We hve $\pi_* K(n) = \FF_p[v_n]$ where $\abs{v_n} = 2p^n - 2$ and $K(n) = \BP / \gens{ ? }$. 
There is a Postnikov tower:


\begin{tikzcd}
	&&&& {k(n)} \\
	&&&& \vdots \\
	\\
	{v_n^2} & {\Sigma^{4p^n-4} \FF_p} &&& {\tau_{\leq 4p^n-4} k(n)} \\
	\\
	{v_n} & {\Sigma^{2p^n-2} \FF_p} &&& {\tau_{\leq 2p^n-2} k(n)} \\
	\\
	&&&& {\FF_p} && {\Sigma^{2p^n-2}\FF_p} && {\Sigma^{4p^n}}
	\arrow[from=1-5, to=2-5]
	\arrow[from=2-5, to=4-5]
	\arrow["{Q_n}", from=8-7, to=8-9]
	\arrow["{Q_n}", from=8-5, to=8-7]
	\arrow[from=6-5, to=8-5]
	\arrow[from=4-5, to=6-5]
	\arrow[from=4-2, to=4-5]
	\arrow[from=6-2, to=6-5]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMTEsWzEsMywiXFxTaWdtYV57NHBebi00fSBcXEZGX3AiXSxbMSw1LCJcXFNpZ21hXnsycF5uLTJ9IFxcRkZfcCJdLFs0LDUsIlxcdGF1X3tcXGxlcSAycF5uLTJ9IGsobikiXSxbNCwzLCJcXHRhdV97XFxsZXEgNHBebi00fSBrKG4pIl0sWzQsMCwiayhuKSJdLFs0LDEsIlxcdmRvdHMiXSxbNCw3LCJcXEZGX3AiXSxbNiw3LCJcXFNpZ21hXnsycF5uLTJ9XFxGRl9wIl0sWzgsNywiXFxTaWdtYV57NHBebn0iXSxbMCwzLCJ2X25eMiJdLFswLDUsInZfbiJdLFs0LDVdLFs1LDNdLFs3LDgsIlFfbiJdLFs2LDcsIlFfbiJdLFsyLDZdLFszLDJdLFswLDNdLFsxLDJdXQ==)

- To build $\tau_{2p^n-2} k(n)$, one just needs to identify $Q_n \in \pi_0 \Hom(\FF_p, \Sigma^{2p^n - 1} \FF_p)$.
So one needs to identify $Q_n \in \pi_* \Hom(\FF_p, \FF_p)$, the $\mathrm{mod} p$ Steenrod algebra.

- To build $\tau_{\leq 4p^n - 4}k(n)$, one needs to check that $Q_n^2 = 0$ in the $\mod p$ Steenrod algebra, which is an Adem relation.

Note that understanding $\pi_* \Hom(\FF_p, \FF_p)$ as a group lets on build $\tau_{\leq 2p^n - 2}k(n)$., but the next stage requires knowing this is a *ring* along with the Adem relation.
Since $\Hom(\FF_p, \FF_p)$ is an $E_1$ ring, and understanding this ring structure would allow building $k(n)$ completely as a spectrum.
Here $\Hom(\FF_p, \FF_p)$ parameterizes all 2-stage Postnikov towers in the sense that its homotopy groups record this data.
:::

:::{.remark}
How to build $k(n)$ as an $E_1$ ring instead of a spectrum:

- Write down the object parameterizing two-stage Postnikov towers in the category of $E_1$ rings.
  This is well-known to be the **$E_1\dash$ center** $\mathcal{Z}_{E_1}(\FF_p)$, also known as $\THC(\FF_p)$, the topological Hochschild cohomology of $\FF_p$.
  This is known to be an $E_2$ ring and if one understands its $E_2$ structure well, one learns that $E_2$ rings are more complicated than 2-stage Postnikov towers.
:::

:::{.remark}
Bokstedt proved that  $\pi_* \THC(\FF_p)$ is concentrated in even degrees.
Thus given any class $x_{2\ell}\in \pi_{2\ell} \THC(\FF_p)$ parameterizing some 2-stage $E_1$ ring, by the previous theorem there is an $E_2$ ring map
\[
S^0[a_{2\ell}] \to \THC(\FF_p)
.\]
:::


