# Monday, March 01

:::{.remark}
Last time: we defined $\Pic(\CP^n)$ as the set of line bundles on $\CP^n$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Picard Group of a Manifold"}
Given any $X\in \Mfd_\CC$, define $\Pic(X)$ as the set of isomorphism classes of holomorphic line bundles on $X$.
This is an abelian group given by $L \tensor L'$ and inversion $L\to L\inv$.
:::

:::{.remark}
We saw that $\Pic(X) \cong H^1(X; \OO\units)$ as groups, noting that $H^1$ has a natural group structure here.
We defined a **tautological bundle** on $\CP^n$ and saw it was isomorphic to $\OO(-1)$, and moreover $\OO(H) \cong \OO(1)$ for $H$ a hyperplane.
The fiber was given by 
\[
\mathrm{Taut} &\to \CP^n \\
\ts{ \lambda (x_0, \cdots, x_n) \st \lambda\in \CC } &\mapsto [x_0: \cdots : x_n]
,\]
i.e. the entire line corresponding to the given projective point.
We also have $\OO(H)(U)$ is the sect of rational homogeneous functions $\phi$ on $U$ of degree 1 such that $\Div \phi + H \geq 0$ where $H \da \ts{x_0 = 0}$.
We want $\phi/x_0$ to be a well-defined function, so $\phi$ should scale like $x_0$ in the sense that 
\[
\phi( \lambda x_0, \cdots, \lambda x_n) = \lambda\phi( x_0, \cdots, x_n)
.\]
Note that there is a natural map
\[
\Taut \tensor \OO(H) \mapsvia{} \OO
,\]
given by taking the line over a point and evaluating the homogeneous function on that line.
Thus $\Taut$ is the inverse of $\OO(H)$.
:::

:::{.remark}
We want to understand what Noether's formula says for $\CP^2$, which requires understanding the canonical bundle $K_{\CP^n}$.
We'll do this by writing down a meromorphic section \( \omega \) (since it's a meromorphic volume form) which will yield $K_{\CP^n} = \OO(\Div \omega)$.
So take
\[
\omega \da x_1\inv dx_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge x_n\inv dx_n 
,\]
noting that we leave out the first coordinate $x_0$ and divide by coordinates to make this scale-invariant.
Here we work in a $\CC^n$ chart of points of the form $[1: x_1 : \cdots : x_n]$.
Where does $\omega$ have poles?
Along $x_i = 0$ for any $1\leq i \leq n$, and similarly in any other coordinate chart.
We also have a 1st order pole along $x_0 = 0$.
We then get 
\[
K_{\CP^n} = \OO(\Div \omega) = \OO( -H_0 -H_1 - \cdots - H_n) = \OO(-n-1)
,\]
where $H_i = \ts{x_i =  0}$.

Note that $\CP^n$ is like a simplex:

\begin{tikzpicture}
\fontsize{45pt}{1em} 
\node (node_one) at (0,0) { \import{/home/zack/SparkleShare/github.com/Notes/Class_Notes/2021/Spring/FourManifolds/sections/figures}{2021-03-01_14-12.pdf_tex} };
\end{tikzpicture}

Applying this to $\CP^2$, we obtain
\[
K_{\CP^2} = \OO(-3)
.\]
What is the intersection form?
We know $H^2(\CP^2; \ZZ) \cong \ZZ$ and the intersection form is unimodular.
So write $\ZZ \da \ZZ \alpha$ for \( \alpha \) some generator.
Then \( \alpha \cdot \alpha = \pm 1 \) since \( \det G = \pm 1 \) for the Gram matrix for this to be unimodular.
Note that \( (- \alpha) \cdot (- \alpha) = \pm 1 \) with the same sign.


:::{.claim}
$\OO(1) = \OO(H)$ generates $\Pic(\CP^2) = H^2(\CP^2; \ZZ)$.
:::

This is because $c_1 \OO(H) \cdot c_1 \OO(H) = H\cdot H = \ts{ x_0 = 0 } \transverse \ts{ x_1 = 0 } = \ts{ [0:0:1] }$ here we note that the two hyperplanes can be oriented transversely and intersected.
This is an oriented intersection.

Recall Noether's formula, which was HRR applied to $\OO$ and the Chern-Gauss-Bonet theorem:
\[
\chi(\OO) 
&= {1\over 12}(K^2 + \chi_\Top)\\
&= h^0(\OO) - h^1(\OO) + h^2(\OO)\\
&= 1 -1 + 1\\
&= 1
.\]
The right-hand side can be written as 
\[
{1\over 12} \qty{ (-3H) \cdot (-3H) + 3} = {1\over 12}(9+3) = 1
.\]
:::

:::{.proposition title="The 4-sphere has no complex structure"}
$S^4$ has no complex structure.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
We know that $\chi_\Top(S^4) = 2$.
If $S^4$ had a complex structure, then $c_1(K_{S^4}) \in H^2(S^4; \ZZ) = 0$.
Thus would make $K_{S^4}^2 = 0$, and so 
\[
\chi( \OO_{S^4} ) = {1\over 12}( 0 + 2) = {1\over 6} \not\in \ZZ
,\]

which is a contradiction. 
$\contradiction$

:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Consider $\bar{\CP}^2$, a 4-manifold diffeomorphic to $\CP^2$ with the opposite orientation.
What is the intersection form?
Taking $H\cdot H = -1$ since the orientations aren't compatible, and more generally the Gram matrix is negated when the orientation is reversed.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Barred projective 2-space is not orientably diffeomorphic to a complex surface"}
$\bar{\CP}^2$ is not diffeomorphic to a complex surface by an orientation-preserving diffeomorphism (or any homeomorphism).
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
We have $\chi_\Top = 3$, and $K_{\bar{\CP}^2} = -c_1(T \bar{\CP}^2) = \pm 3H$.
Then
\[
\chi(\OO) = {1\over 12}\qty{ K_{\bar{\CP}^2}^2 + \chi_\Top} = {1\over 12}(-9+3) \not\in \ZZ
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Consider $\OO_{\CP^n}(d)$, what are its global sections $H^0(\CP^n, \OO_{\CP^n}(d))$.
Locally we have $\OO_{\CP^n}(d)(U)$ given by holomorphic functions in $(x_0, \cdots, x_n) \in \pi\inv(U)$ where $\pi: \CC^{n+1} \to \CP^n$ and the functions satisfy $f(\lambda \vector x) = \lambda^d f(\vector x)$.
The global sections will be the homogeneous degree $d$ polynomials in the coordinates of $\vector x$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Why does a holomorphic function $f: \CC^{n+1} \to \CC$ such that $f(\lambda \vector x) = \lambda^d f(\vector x)$ necessarily a polynomial?
Use the result that any such function with at most polynomial growth is itself a polynomial.
If $\ro{f}{S^{2d+1}}$ is bounded by $C$, we have $\norm{f}_{L^2} \leq C \abs{x}^{2d}$.
Since $(\bd_{x_1} \cdots \bd_{x_k})^d f$ is globally bounded $k\geq 2d$, applying Liouville's theorem makes it constant, and so a finite number of derivatives kill $f$ and this forces it to be polynomial.
:::

:::{.remark}
So how many homogeneous degree $d$ functions are there?
Here
\(
h^0(\CP^n, \OO(d)) =
\)
will be the number of linearly independent degree $d$ polynomials in the variables $x_0, \cdots, x_n$, which is $\multichoose{n+1}{d} = {n + d\choose n}$, using the fact that monomials span this space.
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Using that $h^0(\CP^2; \OO(k))= h^2(\CP^2; \OO(-3-k) )$ by Serre duality and Riemann-Roch, compute $h^i(\CP^2; \OO(k))$ for all $i, k$.
:::

:::{.fact}
$h^i(\CP^n; \OO(k)) = 0$ unless $i=0, n$.
:::













