# Monday, February 15

:::{.remark}
Last time: we saw that \( \chi(\PP^1, \OO) = 1 \), and we'd like to generalize to holomorphic line bundles on a Riemann surface.
This will be the main ingredient for Riemann-Roch.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Euler characteristic and homological vanishing for holomorphic vector bundles"}
Let $X \in \Mfd_\CC$ be compact and let \( \bundle{F} \) be a holomorphic vector bundle on \( X \) 
[^coh_sheaf_general]
Then $\chi$ is well-defined and \[ h^{> \dim_\CC X}(X; \bundle{F} ) = 0.\]

[^coh_sheaf_general]: 
Or more generally a finitely-generated \( \OO\dash \)module, i.e. a coherent sheaf.

:::

:::{.remark}
The locally constant sheaf \( \constantsheaf{\CC} \) is not an \( \OO\dash \)module, i.e. \( \constantsheaf{\CC}(U) \not\in \mods{\OO(U)} \).
In fact, $h^{2i}(X, \constantsheaf{\CC}) = \CC$ for all $i$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of theorem"}
We'll can resolve $\bundle{F}$ as a sheaf by first mapping to its smooth sections and continuing in the following way:
\[
0 \to \bundle{F} \to C^{\infty } \bundle{F} \mapsvia{\delbar} F \tensor A^{0, 1} \to \cdots
,\]
where $\delbar f = \sum_i \dd{f}{\conjugate{z}_i} \, d\conjugate{z}_i$.
Suppose we have a holomorphic trivialization of \( \ro {\bundle{F} }{U} \cong \OO_{U}^{\oplus r} \) and we have sections $(s_1, \cdots, s_r) \in C^{\infty } \bundle{F}(U)$, which are smooth functions on $U$.
In local coordinates we have 
\[
\delbar s \da (\delbar s_1, \cdots, \delbar s_r)
,\] 
but is this well-defined globally?
Given a different trivialization over $V \subseteq X$, the $s_i$ are related by transition functions, so the new sections are $t_{UV}(s_1, \cdots, s_r)$ where $t_{UV}: U \intersect V \to \GL_r(\CC)$.
Since $t_{UV}$ are holomorphic, we have 
\[
\delbar( t_{UV} (s_1, \cdots, s_r)) = t_{UV} \delbar(s_1, \cdots, s_r)
.\]
This makes $\delbar: C^{\infty } \bundle{F} \to F\tensor A^{0, 1}$ a well-defined (but not $\OO\dash$linear) map.
We can thus continue this resolution using the Leibniz rule:

\[
0 \to \bundle{F} \to C^{\infty } \bundle{F} \mapsvia{\delbar} F \tensor A^{0, 1} \mapsvia{\delbar} \cdots F \tensor A^{0, 2} \mapsvia{\delbar} \cdots
,\]
which is an exact sequence of sheaves since $(A^{0, \wait}, \delbar)$ is exact.

\todo[inline]{Why? Split into line bundles?}

We can identify $C^{\infty }\sheaf{F} = \sheaf{F} \tensor A^{0, 0}$, and $\sheaf{F} \tensor A^{0, q}$ is a smooth vector bundle on $X$.
Using partitions of unity, we have that $\sheaf{F} \tensor A^{0, q}$ is acyclic, so its higher cohomology vanishes, and 
\[
H^i(X; \sheaf{F} ) \cong 
\frac
{ \ker ( \delbar: \sheaf{F}\tensor A^{0, i} \to \sheaf{F} \tensor A^{0, i+1} }
{ \im ( \delbar: \sheaf{F}\tensor A^{0, i-1} \to \sheaf{F} \tensor A^{0, i} }
.\]
However, we know that $A^{0, p} = 0$ for all $p> n \da \dim_\CC X$, since any wedge of $p>n$ forms necessarily vanishes since there are only $n$ complex coordinates.
:::

:::{.warnings}
This only applies to holomorphic vector bundles or $\OO\dash$modules!
:::

## Riemann-Roch

:::{.theorem title="Riemann-Roch"}
Let $C$ be a compact connected Riemann surface, i.e. $C\in \Mfd_\CC$ with $\dim_\CC(C) = 1$, and let $\bundle{L}\to C$ be a holomorphic line bundle.
Then
\[
\chi(C, \bundle{L}) = \deg(L) + (1-g) && \text{where } \deg(L) \da \int_C c_1(\bundle{L})
\]
and $g$ is the genus of $C$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of Riemann-Roch"}
We'll introduce the notion of a "point bundle", which are particularly nice line bundles, denoted $\OO(p)$ for $p\in \CC$.

\begin{tikzpicture}
\fontsize{34pt}{1em} 
\node (node_one) at (0,0) { \import{/home/zack/SparkleShare/github.com/Notes/Class_Notes/2021/Spring/FourManifolds/sections/figures}{2021-02-15_14-16.pdf_tex} };
\end{tikzpicture}

Taking $\DD$ to be a disc of radius $1/2$ and $V$ to be its complement, we have $t_{uv}(z) = z\inv \in \OO^*(U \intersect V)$.
We can take a holomorphic section $s_p \in H^0( C, \OO(p) )$, where $\ro{s_p}{U} = z$ and $\ro{s_p}{V} = 1$.
Then $t_{uv}( \ro{s_p}{U} ) = \ro{s_p}{V}$ on the overlaps.
We have a function which precisely vanishes to first order at $p$.
Recall that $c_1( \OO(p) )$ is represented by $[ V(s) ] = [p]$, and moreover $\int_C c_1 ( \OO(p) ) = 1$.
We now want to generalize this to a **divisor**: a formal $\ZZ\dash$linear combination of points.


:::{.example title="?"}
Take $p, q,r\in C$, then a divisor can be defined as something like $D \da 2[p] - [q] + 3[r]$.
:::

Define $\OO(D) \da \bigotimes_{i} \OO(p_i)^{\tensor n_i}$ for any $D = \sum n_i [p_i]$.
Here tensoring by negatives means taking duals, i.e. $\OO( -[p] ) \da \OO^{\tensor_{-1}} \da \OO(p)\dual$, the line bundle with inverted transition functions.
$\OO(D)$ has a meromorphic section given by 
\[
s_D \da \prod s_{p_i}^{n_i} \in \Mero(C, \OO(D) )
\]
where we take the sections coming from point bundles.
We can compute \[
\int_C c_1 ( \OO(D) ) = \sum n_i \da \deg(D)
.\].

:::{.example title="?"}
\[
\deg( 2[p] -[q] + 3[r]) = 4
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Assume our line bundle $L$ is $\OO(D)$, we'll prove Riemann-Roch in this case by induction on $\sum \abs{n_i}$.
The base case is $\OO$, which corresponds to taking an empty divisor.
Then either

- Take $D = D_0 + [p]$ with $\deg(D_0) < \sum \abs{n_i}$ (for which we need some positive coefficient), or
- Take $D_0 = D + [p]$.


:::

:::{.claim}
There is an exact sequence
\[
0 \to \OO(D_0) &\to \OO(D) \to \CC_p \to 0\\
s\in \OO(D_0)(U) &\mapsto s \cdot s_p \in \OO( D_0 + [p] ) (U)
,\]
where the last term is the skyscraper sheaf at $p$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of claim"}
The given map is $\OO\dash$linear and injective, since $s_p\neq 0$ and $s s_p=0$ forces $s=0$.
Recall that we looked at \( \OO \mapsvia{\cdot z} \OO \) on $\CC$, and this section only vanishes at $p$ (and to first order).
The same situation is happening here.
:::

Thus there is a LES

\begin{tikzcd}
	&&&& 0 \\
	\\
	{H^0( \OO(D_0) )} && {H^0( \OO(D) )} && {H^0( \OO(\CC_p) )} \\
	\\
	{H^1( \OO(D_0) )} && {H^1( \OO(D) )} && {H^1( \OO(\CC_p) ) = 0} \\
	\\
	0
	\arrow[from=3-5, to=5-1, out=0, in=180]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=3-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=5-1, to=5-3]
	\arrow[from=5-3, to=5-5]
	\arrow[from=1-5, to=3-1, out=0, in=180]
	\arrow[from=5-5, to=7-1, out=0, in=180]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsOCxbMCwyLCJIXjAoIFxcT08oRF8wKSApIl0sWzIsMiwiSF4wKCBcXE9PKEQpICkiXSxbNCwyLCJIXjAoIFxcT08oXFxDQ19wKSApIl0sWzAsNCwiSF4xKCBcXE9PKERfMCkgKSJdLFsyLDQsIkheMSggXFxPTyhEKSApIl0sWzQsNCwiSF4xKCBcXE9PKFxcQ0NfcCkgKSA9IDAiXSxbNCwwLCIwIl0sWzAsNiwiMCJdLFsyLDNdLFswLDFdLFsxLDJdLFszLDRdLFs0LDVdLFs2LDBdLFs1LDddXQ==)


We also have $h^1(\CC_p) = 0$ by taking a sufficiently fine open cover where $p$ is only in one open set.
So just checking Čech cocycles yields $C_U^1(C, \CC_p) \da \prod_{i<j} \CC_p(U_i \intersect U_j) = 0$ since $p$ is in no intersection.

\begin{tikzpicture}
\fontsize{35pt}{1em} 
\node (node_one) at (0,0) { \import{/home/zack/SparkleShare/github.com/Notes/Class_Notes/2021/Spring/FourManifolds/sections/figures}{2021-02-15_14-38.pdf_tex} };
\end{tikzpicture}

We obtain $\chi( \OO(D) = \chi( \OO(D_0) ) + 1$, using that it is additive in SESs 
\[
0 \to 
\sheaf{E}_1 \to
\sheaf{E}_2 \to
\sheaf{E}_3 \to
0
\implies && 
\chi(\sheaf{E}_2) = \chi( \sheaf{E_1}) + \chi( \sheaf{E}_3 )
\]
and thus
\[
\int_C c_1 (\OO(D) ) = \sum n_i = \deg(D) = \deg D_0 + 1
.\]
The last step is to show that $\chi(C, \OO) = 1-g$, so just define $g$ so that this is true!
:::

:::{.remark}
Why is every $L \cong \OO(D)$ for some $D$?
Easy to see if $L$ has meromorphic sections: if $s$ is a meromorphic section of $L$, then the following works:
\[
D = \div(s) = \sum_p \ord_p(s) [p]
.\]
Then $\OO \cong L\tensor \OO(-D)$ has a meromorphic section $s s_{-D}$, a global nonvanishing section with $\div(s s_{-D} ) = \emptyset$.
Proving that every holomorphic line bundle has a meromorphic section is hard!
:::

