# Wednesday, April 21

:::{.remark}
Why can't one blow down a curve $E\cong \CP^1$ with $E^2 = 1$ in a complex surface?
Disproof: consider $S\da \CP^2$ and $E$ a line, where $E^2 = 1$.
If there were a blowdown in the complex analytic category
\[
S &\to \bar{S} \\
E &\mapsto \pt
.\]
But $\bar{S} \cong_\Top S^4$, since $S^4 \# \CP^2 \cong \CP^2$, and this would yield a complex structure on $S^4$ -- a contradiction.
This also follows because $\bar{S} \in \ZHS^4$, and Noether's formula implies that every $\ZHS^4$ has no complex structure.
:::

:::{.remark}
Recall that we were considering the following:

\begin{tikzcd}
	& {\Bl_{p, q}\CP^2} \\
	\\
	{\CP^1 \cross \CP^2} && {\CP^2}
	\arrow["\sigma"', from=1-2, to=3-1]
	\arrow["\pi", from=1-2, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMyxbMSwwLCJcXEJsX3twLCBxfVxcQ1BeMiJdLFsyLDIsIlxcQ1BeMiJdLFswLDIsIlxcQ1BeMSBcXGNyb3NzIFxcQ1BeMSJdLFswLDIsIlxcc2lnbWEiLDJdLFswLDEsIlxccGkiXV0=)

Let $\bar{\ell} \subset \Bl_{p, q}(\CP^2)$ the strict transform of a line through $p, q$ with $\hat{\ell}^2 = -1$.
Goal: we want to construct the map $\sigma$ sending $\hat{\ell}$ to a single point.
Let $r\in \Bl_{p, q}\CP^2$, then there are three possibilities:

1. $r\in \CP^2 \sm \ts{ p, q }$
2. $r\in E_p$
3. $r\in E_q$

If a point $r \neq p, q$, we can take lines $\ell_{pr}. \ell_{qr}$.
We can take slopes of these lines to get points in $\CP^1$, and in fact it's the exceptional divisor (since these are sets of slopes through a point).

So we can map
\[
r \mapsto 
\begin{cases}
( \slope_p \ell_{pr}, \slope_q \ell_{qr} ) \in \CP^2 \cross \CP^2
& \text{Case 1}
\\
(r, \slope_q \ell_{qp} ) 
& \text{Case 2}
\\
(\slope_p \ell_{pq}, r)
&\text{Case 3}
.
\end{cases}
\]
This is clearly continuous, is this injective?
The outputs will be the same for any point on the line between $p$ and $q$:

\begin{tikzpicture}
\fontsize{45pt}{1em} 
\node (node_one) at (0,0) { \import{/home/zack/SparkleShare/github.com/Notes/Class_Notes/2021/Spring/FourManifolds/sections/figures}{2021-04-21_14-16.pdf_tex} };
\end{tikzpicture}

So this realizes the blowdown map, since $\Phi \hat{\ell}_{pq} ) = \pt$ and restricting it to  the complement of the line is injective.

:::

## Spin and Spinc Groups

:::{.remark}
Goal: show that $3[\ell]$ can't be realized by a sphere, we'll need Rohklin's theorem for this.
Let $(V, \inner{\wait}{\wait})$ be an inner product space, and assume the inner product is positive-definite.
Recall that the tensor algebra is defined as $T(V) \da \bigoplus _{n\geq 0} V^{\tensor n}$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Clifford Algebra"}
Define the **Clifford Algebra** of $V$ as
\[
\Cl(V) \da T(V) / \gens{ v\tensor v + \norm{v}^2 1 } 
.\]
:::

:::{.example title="The reals"}
Take $\RR$ with the standard inner product, so $\inner{x}{y} \da xy$.
Then $T(\RR) = \bigoplus _{n\geq 0} \RR$.
Letting \( \ts{ e } \) be a basis of $\RR$, we have $T(\RR) = \RR \oplus \RR e \oplus \RR (e^2) \oplus \cdots \cong \RR[x]$ by sending $e^n\mapsto x^n$.
Since $\norm{e} = 1$, and we mod out by $e^2 + \norm{e}^2 1$ where $e^2 = -1$ and thus
\[
\Cl(\RR, \inner{\wait}{\wait}_\std ) \cong \RR[x] / \gens{ x^2 = -1 }\cong \CC 
.\]
The denominator is referred to as the **Clifford relation**.
:::

:::{.example title="More reals"}
Take $\RR^2$ with the standard inner product and an orthonormal basis  \( \ts{ e_1, e_2 } \).
Then
\[
T(\RR) = \RR \oplus \RR \gens{ e_1, e_2 } \oplus \RR \gens{ e_1^2, e_1e_2, e_2 e_1, e_2^2 } \oplus \cdots  
.\]
Note that there are $2^k$ terms in the $k$th graded piece.
It suffices to mod out only by the relations on the orthonormal basis.
This is of the form $(v+w)^2 = - \norm{v+w}^2 = -\norm{v}^2 - 2\inner{v}{w} - \norm{w}^2$. 
On the other hand, this equals $v^2 + vw + wv + w^2$.
So we obtain
\[
vw + wv = 2\inner{v}{w}
,\]
and setting $v=w$ and dividing by 2 yields the original Clifford relation.

For $\RR^2$, we can explicitly check

1. $e_1^2 = -1$,
2. $e_2^2 = -1$,
3. $e_1e_2 + e_2 e_1 = -2e_1 e_2 = 0$,
4. $e_1 e_2 = -e_2 e_1$.

Here (1), (2), and (4) generate all of the relations, so
\[
\Cl(\RR^2) - \RR \gens{ e_1, e_2 } / \gens{ e_1^2 = -1, e_2^2 =-1, e_1e_2 = -e_2 e_1 } \cong HH
.\]
We can form this map by 
\[
1 &\mapsto 1 \\
e_1 &\mapsto i \\
e_2 &\mapsto j \\
e_1 e_2 &\mapsto k
,\]
and then checking that the appropriate relations hold.
These hold since $i^2 = j^2 = -1$ and $ij=-ji = k$.
These suffice, but you can check the rest: for example, does $jk=i$ hold?
We can write this as
\[
e_2(e_1e_2) = -e_2 (e_2 e_1) = -e_2^2 e_1 = -(-1)e_1 = e_1
.\]
:::

:::{.exercise title="?"}
Check that $\dim_\RR \Cl(V) = 2^{\dim V} < \infty$.
:::






