# Monday, March 29

:::{.remark}
Last time: the Hodge decomposition theorem.
Let $(X, g) \in \Mfd_\CC^\cpt(\Kah)$, then the space of harmonic $k\dash$forms \( \mathcal{H}^k(X)  \tensor_\RR \CC \) decomposes as \( \bigoplus_{p+q = k} \mathcal{H}^{p, q}(X)  \).
There is also a symmetry \( \bar{\mathcal{H}^{p, q}(X) } = \mathcal{H}^{q, p}(X) \).
We have an isomorphism to the de Rham cohomology \( \mathcal{H}^k(X) \tensor_\RR \CC \cong H^k_\dR (X; \CC)  \).
We know the constituent pieces as well, as well as several relationships:
\[ 
\mathcal{H}^{p, q}(X) &= \ker (\Delta_d: A^{p, q}(X) \selfmap) \\
\Delta_{\delbar} &= \delbar \delbar^\dagger + \delbar^\dagger \delbar \\
\Delta_d &= 2 \Delta_{\delbar} 
.\]
There was a proposition that \( \ker(\Delta_d) = \ker(d) \intersect \ker(d^\dagger) \), and the same proposition holds for \( \Delta_{\delbar} \).
In this case we have \( \ker(\Delta_{\delbar}) = \ker(\delbar) \intersect \ker( \delbar^\dagger) \) on $A^{p, q}(X)$, and this is isomorphic to \( \ker(\delbar) / \im(\delbar) \).
Recall that we resolved the sheaf \( \Omega^p \) of holomorphic $p\dash$forms by taking the Dolbeault resolution
\[
0 \to \Omega^p \to A^{p, 0} \mapsvia{\delbar} A^{p, 1} \mapsvia{\delbar} A^{p, 2} \to \cdots
.\]
Thus we can identify \( \ker(\delbar)/\im(\delbar) \cong \Hsh( X; \Omega^p) \) as sheaf cohomology.
We defined \( h^{p, q}(X) \da \dim_\CC H^{p, q}(X) \).
:::

:::{.corollary title="Homology is independent of the choice of Kähler form"}
$h^{p,q }(X)$ is independent of the Kähler form, noting that the isomorphism to sheaf cohomology doesn't involve taking adjoints, 
and $\dim_\CC \Hsh^q(X; \Omega^p)$ doesn't depend on the complex structure.
:::

:::{.remark}
A priori, one could vary the Kähler form and have some $h^{p, q}$ jump or drop dimension.
It also turns out that varying the complex structure will also not change these dimensions.
:::

:::{.remark}
Whenever the Hodge-de Rham spectral sequence degenerates, one generally gets $\sum_{p+q} h^{p,q } = h^k$.
Note that there is a resolution:
\[
0 \to \constantsheaf{\CC} \to \OO \mapsvia{d} \Omega^1 \mapsvia{d} \Omega^2 \mapsvia{d} \cdots
,\]
which is not acyclic and thus has homology.
In general, the spectral sequence is 
\[
E^1_{p,q} = \Hsh^q(X; \Omega^p) \abuts \Hsh^{p+q}(X; \constantsheaf{\CC})
.\]
:::

:::{.fact}
A fact about the cohomology of vector bundles: given a family of Kähler manifolds $X_t$, one can consider \( H^q(X_t; \bundle{E}_t \) where \( \bundle{E}_t \) is a family of holomorphic vector bundles. 
This can only jump upward in dimension, i.e. $\dim_\CC H^q(X_t; \bundle{E}_t)$ is **lower semicontinuous**.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Consider
\[
X_t \da \ts{ x^3 + y^3 + z^3 + txyz = 0 } \subseteq \CP^2
,\]
where $t$ varies in $\CC$.
These all admit a line bundle \( \bundle{L}_t \da \ro{ \OO(1) } {X_t} \), the anti-tautological line bundle on $\PP^2$.

\begin{tikzpicture}
\fontsize{45pt}{1em} 
\node (node_one) at (0,0) { \import{/home/zack/SparkleShare/github.com/Notes/Class_Notes/2021/Spring/FourManifolds/sections/figures}{2021-03-29_14-14.pdf_tex} };
\end{tikzpicture}

The real points of this vanishing locus form an elliptic curve, and each $X_t$ is a Riemann surface of genus 1.
Note that $h^{0, 1}$ can jump on closed sets, but $H^1$ is constant since Riemann-Roch involves genus and degree.
What is $\deg \ro {\OO(1)}{X_t}$?
Take a section $s \in H^0(\PP^2; \OO(1))$ which vanishes on a line in $\PP^2$.
How many points lie in a line intersected with $X_t$?
Looking at fundamental classes, we have $[X_t] = 3\ell$, and by Bezout $3\ell \cdot \ell = 3$.

The point is that $H^q(X_t; \Omega^p)$ can only possibly increase at special values of $t$.
Assuming the $X_t$ are all diffeomorphic, then $h^k(X_t)$ is constant and $h^{p, q}(X_t)$ can't jump.
So the $h^{p, q}$ are invariants of families.
:::

:::{.definition title="Hodge Diamond"}
The **Hodge Diamond** of $X \in \Mfd(\Kahler)$ (which won't depend on the choice of Kähler form) is given by

\begin{tikzcd}
	&&& {h^{n, n}} \\
	&& {h^{n-1, n}} && {h^{n, n-1}} \\
	& \ddots &&&& \ddots \\
	\ddots &&& \vdots &&& \ddots \\
	& {h^{2, 0}} && {h^{1, 1}} && {h^{0, 2}} \\
	&& {h^{1, 0}} && {h^{0, 1}} \\
	&&& {h^{0, 0}}
	\arrow["\hodgestar"{pos=0}, dotted, tail reversed, from=6-3, to=2-5]
	\arrow["{z\mapsto \bar{z}}"', dotted, tail reversed, from=6-5, to=2-5]
	\arrow["{z\mapsto \bar{z}}", dotted, tail reversed, from=6-3, to=2-3]
	\arrow["\hodgestar"{description, pos=0.1}, dotted, tail reversed, from=6-5, to=2-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=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)

Note that there are symmetries, e.g. $\hodgestar$ takes $h^{1, 0} = h^{n-1, n}$ and $\bar{h^{p, q}} = h^{q, p}$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="CYs have extra Hodge diamond symmetry"}
If $X$ is **Calabi-Yau**, so $K_X = \OO_X$ (i.e the canonical bundle is trivial), then the Hodge diamond has an orientation preserving $(\ZZ/2)^2$ symmetry, i.e. there is a rotation by $\pi/2$.

> Note: this isn't extra symmetry! Just a proof of the symmetry in this case.

:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Let \( \Omega^k_X \) be the sheaf of holomorphic $k\dash$forms,
then there is a map 

\[
\Omega_X^k \tensor \Omega_X^{n-k} &\to \Omega_X^n \da K_X \\
\alpha \tensor \beta &\mapsto \alpha \wedge \beta
.\]
Fiberwise, this is a perfect pairing.
If one takes $\alpha \da e_{i_1} \wedge \cdots e_{i_k} \in \Wedge^k T_x\dual X$, there is a unique basis wedge $\beta \da e_{j_1} \wedge \cdots \wedge e_{j_n - k}$ then \( \alpha\wedge \beta \) is a basis wedge \( e_1 \wedge \cdots \wedge e_n \).
So \( \Omega_X^k \cong ( \Omega_X^{n-k} )\dual \) if $X$ is Calabi-Yau.
By Serre duality, 
\[
\Hsh ^p(X; \Omega_X^q)\dual \cong \Hsh^{n-p}(X; (\Omega_X^q)\dual \tensor K_X )
.\]
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
In dimension 3, take 
\[
X \da \ts{ x_0^5 + \cdots + x_4^5 = 0 } \subseteq \PP^4 \in \Mfd^3(\CC)
.\]

See Hodge diamond.

:::

:::{.remark}
Note that $K3$s are special CYs.
An example is $\CC^2 / \Lambda$ for \( \Lambda \) a rank 4 lattice.
This is diffeomorphic to $(S^1)^4$, for example $E\cross E$.
:::
