# Wednesday, October 06

:::{.remark}
Recall: $X\in \Sch$ is integral iff $X$ is irreducible and reduced, which are defined on sections in terms of rings. 
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
**Irreducible and reduced $\implies$ integral**:
By contrapositive, assume $\OO_X(U)$ is not a domain, so $fg = 0$ in $\OO_X(U)$.
A local ring need not be domain.
However, the germ $f_p g_p \da \Res(U, \mfp)(fg) = 0$ in the stalk $\OO_{X, \mfp}$.
If $(a/s)(b/t) = 0 \in \mfp$, then either $a/s$ or $b/t$ is in $\mfp$, so $f_p$ or $g_p$ is in $\mfp$.
Note that $U_1 \da \ts{\mfm \in U \st f_p \in \mfm} \subseteq U$ is closed, as is $U_2 \da \ts{\mfm\in U \st g_p \in \mfm}$.

We can write $U = U_1 \union U_2$, so if $X$ is irreducible then $U$ is irreducible, so some $U_i = U$, say $U_1$.
So take an open affine $V \subseteq U_1$ with $\ro{f}{V}\neq 0$, using the sheaf property.
Writing $V = \spec R$, we have $\ro{f}{V} \in \OO_X(V) = R$, and the stalk $f_p\in p$ for all $p\in R$.
Then $f\in p$ for all $p\in \spec R$, thus in their intersection, and so $f\in \nilrad{R}$.
Since $f\neq 0$, this contradicts that $X$ is not reduced.
$\contradiction$
:::


:::{.remark}
Recall that *Noetherian rings* are those that satisfy the ACC, or equivalently that all ideals are finitely generated (e.g. a finitely generated $k\dash$algebra).

A *Noetherian space* is a space where every descending sequence of closed sets stabilizes.
:::

:::{.definition title="Noetherian rings and spaces"}
$X\in \Sch$ is **locally Noetherian** iff there exists an affine open cover with $U_i = \spec A_i$ for $A_i$ Noetherian.
$X$ is **(globally) Noetherian** if $X$ is additionally *quasicompact*, i.e. every open cover has a finite subcover.
:::

:::{.example title="Non-Noetherian rings can produce Noetherian spaces"}
The hypothesis of being a Noetherian space isn't enough in general.
Consider the ring of *puiseux series* studied by Newton, $R = \Union_{n\geq 1} k\formalpowerseries{t^{1\over n}}$.
Then $\spec R$ has 2 points:
\[
\spec R = \ts{ \mfp \da \gens{t^r}_{r \in \QQ_{\geq 0}}, \gens 0 }
.\]
Here $\gens{0}$ has closure containing $\mfp$, so $\mfp$ is a generic point.
This is a valuation ring, just not a DVR, and is a Noetherian topological space since there are only two closed sets.
However, $R$ is not Noetherian, since there is an infinite chain of ideals:
\[
\ts{I_j}_{j\geq 1}: \quad \gens{t} \subsetneq \gens{t^{1\over 2}} \subsetneq \gens{t^{1\over 3}} \subsetneq \gens{t^{1\over 3}} \subsetneq \cdots
.\]
However, $V(I_j) = V(I_{k})$ for all $j, k$, and all equal to $V(\gens p)$, so $\spec R$ is a Noetherian space!

Fun fact: $\ff(R) = \Union_{n\geq 1} k\laurentseries{t^{1\over n}} = \bar{k\laurentseries{t}}$ when $k=\kbar$.
:::

:::{.remark}
There are many theorems of the form "a scheme is locally *something*".
Here we required an open affine cover by $\spec R$ for $R$ Noetherian rings.
The following two conditions will thus be equivalent:

- A property $P$ holds on every affine open $U \subseteq X$,
- There exists some affine cover $\mcu \covers X$ satisfying property $P$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
$X\in \Sch$ is locally Noetherian iff for any affine open $U = \spec A \subseteq X$, $A$ is a Noetherian ring.
:::

:::{.proof title="of theorem"}
$\impliedby$:
Definitional, just apply the hypothesis to some affine open cover.

$\implies$:
The more nontrivial direction.


:::{.fact title="from ring theory"}
The localization of any Noetherian ring is again Noetherian
:::

Let $U \subseteq X$ be an affine open, so $U = \spec B$, and let $\mcu \covers X$ be an affine cover:

\begin{tikzpicture}
\fontsize{45pt}{1em} 
\node (node_one) at (0,0) { \import{/home/zack/SparkleShare/github.com/Notes/Class_Notes/2021/Fall/Schemes/sections/figures}{2021-10-06_12-15.pdf_tex} };
\end{tikzpicture}

Consider $U \intersect \mcu_i \subseteq \mcu_i$ open, which can be covered by distinguished open sets.
So write $U \intersect \mcu_i = \Union_j V_{ij}$ with $V_{ij} = D(f_{ij}) \subseteq \spec A_{i}$. 
Then $U$ is covered by $\spec A_i\localize{f_{ij}}$, i.e. spectra of local Noetherian rings.
Can we conclude that $B$ is Noetherian from this?
This will follow from the fact that we can further decompose $V_{ij} = \Union W_{ijk}$ where $W_{ijk} = D_B(f_{ijk})$.

So we want to show the following ring-theoretic statement: let $B\in \Ring$ and $\ts{g_i} \subseteq B$ be a collection such that $\spec B = \Union \spec B\localize{g_i}$ with each $B\localize{g_i}$ Noetherian, then $B$ is necessarily Noetherian.
Equivalently, we need $\gens{g_i} = \gens {1}$, which corresponds to $\intersect V(g_i) = \emptyset$.
:::

