# Equivariant \(\K\dash\)theory (Wednesday, September 22)

:::{.remark}
The setup: $G\actson X$ a topological group acting on a space.

- Gelfand (30s): replace $X$ with a topological vector space $T$, e.g. "generalized functions" on $X$.
  This linearises the problem, but is usually something like a infinite dimensional Hilbert space.

- Harish-Chandra, Vogan: 
  Replace $T$ with an algebraic object (usually finite-dimensional) and apply \(\K\dash\)theory.
  Here \(\K\dash\)theory simplifies the problem, since all invariants that are additive on exact sequences can be recovered from it.


Classical literature on this is phrased in terms of $X$ a *separated algebraic space*, since even nice quotients of varieties are often not again varieties.
We'll assume $X$ is an algebraic variety, automatically separated, and quasiprojective.
This will imply that $X \subseteq G/P$ embeds into a flag variety, e.g. for $G = \GL_n$ and $P$ a parabolic this covers $\PP^n$.
For us, projective will mean that $X \subseteq G/P$ is closed, which will turn out to admit ample line bundles.
:::

:::{.definition title="?"}
Let $(\wait)^\gp$ denote taking the Grothendieck group, then
\[
G_0(G, X) \da \Coh^G(X)^\gp \\
\K_0(G, X) \da \VectBundle^G\slice{X}
,\]
i.e. the $G\dash$equivariant coherent sheaves and vector bundles respectively.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that vector bundles don't form an abelian category -- here instead you take the additive monoid generated by addition of vector bundle.
However coherent sheaves do form an abelian category, so this denotes the usual Grothendieck group for abelian categories.
Of modern interest: split Grothendieck groups, triangulated, etc.

Here one should think of $\G$ as something analogous to Borel-Moore homology, and $\K$ is closer to cohomology.
Note that in classical settings, one could cap against the fundamental class to get a map between them.
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
If $X$ is a smooth $G\dash$variety admitting an equivariant ample line bundle, then there is an isomorphism
\[
\K_0(G, X) \mapsvia{?} G_0(G, X)
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
This map records how a vector bundle can be regarded as a coherent sheaf!
For the rest of today, we'll assume $X$ admits a $G\dash$equivariant ample line bundle and refer to this as condition $\star$.
If this proposition holds, notationally we'll always write $\K^G(X) = \K_0(X) = G_0(X)$.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Consider the coherent sheaf $\OO_x\sumpower{n}$, which should correspond to the trivial bundle $X\times \CC^n \to X$.
If $\xi$ is a vector bundle, then the sheaf of sections is a locally free coherent sheaf.
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
Every $G\dash$equivariant coherent sheaf $\mcf \in \Coh^G(X)$ on $X$ admits a finite resolution by $G\dash$equivariant locally free sheaves of finite type.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
\envlist

- If $G =1$, then admitting an ample line bundle as above is equivalent to $X \subseteq G/P$ being a subvariety.
  Then $\K^G(X) = \K(X)$, the algebraic \(\K\dash\)theory, of $X$.

- If $X = \pt$, it is smooth, and $\K^G(X) = R(G)$, the representation ring of $G$.
  This holds for $G$ any linear algebraic group.

:::

:::{.remark}
So this mixes usual \(\K\dash\)theory and representation theory!
It turns out that for $X=\pt$, there is an equivalence of categories $\Coh^G(\pt) = \VectBundle^G = \mods{G}^\fd$.

If $X$ is projective and $G$ is semisimple, then $\star$ is true.
If $E\to X$ is a $G\dash$vector bundle on $X$ smooth projective, then we'll write $\K^G(X)$ for $\G_0(G, X) = \K_0(G, X)$.
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
Every $\mcf \in \Coh^G(X)$ is a quotient of a $G\dash$equivariant locally free sheaf $\mce$ of finite type on $X$.
:::

> See proof: Borho, Byrlinksi, MacPherson.
> Geometric perspective on ring theory?

:::{.remark}
Let $G \in \Alg\Grp$ be linear acting on $V\in \mods{\CC}$ possibly infinite dimensional.
This is common, e.g. when $G$ consists of regular functions.
This is infinite dimensional, but not so bad -- it's not quite as big as a Hilbert space.
We'll say the action is **algebraic** if it acts locally finitely: the $G\dash$orbit of any vector should be a finite dimensional subspace.
Consider $\Map(G, M) \da \Hom_{\Set}(G, M) = \ts{ f:G\to M}$ with no conditions at all on the functions.
There is a subspace of "regular functions with coefficients in $M$",
using the following well-defined map:
\[
\CC[G] \tensor_\CC M &\to \Map(G, M) \\
\sum f_i \tensor m_i &\mapsto \sum f(g_i) m_i
,\]
using that the $f(g_i)$ are scalars in $M$.

For a fixed $m$, there is a $G\dash$action $g\mapsto gm$, and so letting $m$ vary yields a map $M \mapsvia{a_M}  \Map(G, M)$.

:::{.claim}
$G$ acts algebraically on $M$ iff $\im a_m \subseteq \CC[G]\tensor_\CC M$.
:::

If the action is algebraic, take $G_m \subseteq V \subseteq M$ with $V$ a $G\dash$stable finite dimensional subspace.
Expanding in a basis and writing $g\mapsto gm$ in this basis yields the $f_i$, which are regular.
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
If $\mcf \in \Coh^G(X)$, then $\globsec{X; \mcf}$ has the natural structure of an algebraic $G\dash$module.
:::
