# Definitions

:::{.definition title="Fundamental group"}
\[
\pi_1(X) \definedas [S^1, X].
,\]
which measures homotopy classes of *loops* in $X$.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
$\pi_1 T^2 = \ZZ^{\ast 2}$, a *free* abelian group of rank 2.
:::

:::{.definition title="Homotopy"}
Given two paths $P_1, P_2: I \to X$ (where we identify the paths with their images under these maps), then a *homotopy* from $P_1$ to $P_2$ is a function
$$
H: I \to (I \to X) \\
H(0, \wait) = x_0 \\
H(1, \wait) = x_1 \\ \\
H(\wait, 0) = P_1(\wait)\\
H(\wait, 1) = P_2(\wait)\\
$$
such that the associated "partially applied" function $H_t: I \to X$ is continuous.
:::

:::{.remark}
Can think of this as a map from the cylinder on $X$ into $Y$, or deformations through continuous functions.
This is an equivalence relation. If $f: X \to Y$ is a map, we write $[X, Y]$ to denote the homotopy classes of maps $X$ to $Y$. 
:::

:::{.definition title="Homotopic maps"}
Given two maps $f, g: X \to Y$, we say $f$ is *homotopic* to $g$ and write $f \sim g$ if there is a homotopy
$$
H: I \to (X \to Y) \\
H(0, \wait) = f(\wait)\\
H(1, \wait) = g(\wait)\\
$$

such that $H_t: X \to Y$ is continuous.
:::

:::{.definition title="Higher homotopy groups"}
\[
\pi_n(X) \definedas [S^n, X].
\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Introduced by Čech in 1932, Alexandrov reportedly told him to withdraw because it couldn't possibly be the right generalization due to the following theorem:
:::

:::{.definition title="CW Complex"}
A CW complex is any space built from the following inductive process:
Write $X_n$ for the $n\dash$skeleton.
\

- Let $X_0$ by a discrete set of points. 
- Let $X_{n+1}$ be obtained from $X_n$ by taking a collection of $n\dash$ balls and glue them to $X_n$ by maps $$\phi: \del B^n \to X_n$$.
- If infinitely many stages, let $X = \union X_n$ with the **weak topology** $A \subset X$ is open iff $A \intersect X_n$ is open for all $n$.


:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Every graph is a 1-dimensional CW complex
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Identification polyhedra for surfaces
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
$S_n = e_0 + e_n$ by gluing $B^{n+1}$ to a point by a map $\phi: \del B^{n+1} \to \pt$, i.e. $B^{n+1} / B^n \cong S^n$. Can also attach two hemispheres at each $i\leq n$ to get $S^n = e_0 + e_1 + 2e_2 + \cdots + 2e_n$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Cellular homology is very easy to compute!
Replacing $\phi$ with a homotopic map yields an equivalent CW complex. 
So understanding CW complexes boils down to understanding $[S^n, S^m]$ for $m < n$, i.e. higher homotopy groups of spheres.
:::

:::{.definition title="Cellular Map"}
A map between $f:X \to Y$ between CW complex is *cellular* if $f(X_{(k)}) \subseteq Y_{(k)}$ for every $k$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Homotopy equivalence"}
Two spaces $X, Y$ are said to be *homotopy equivalent* if there exists a maps $f: X \to Y$ and $f\inv: Y \to X$ such that
$$
f\circ f\inv \homotopic \id_Y \\
f\inv \circ f \homotopic \id_X
$$

:::

:::{.definition title="Weak Equivalence"}
A continuous map
$$
f: X \to Y 
$$
is called a *weak homotopy equivalence* if the induced map
$$
f_*: \pi_*(X) \to \pi_*(Y)
$$
is a graded isomorphism.
:::

:::{.remark}
This is a strictly weaker notion than homotopy equivalence -- we don't require an explicit inverse.
A weak homotopy equivalence also induces isomorphisms on all homology and cohomology, with any coefficients by the universal coefficients theorem.
This is a strictly weaker notion than homotopy equivalence - for example, let $L$ be the long line. Then $\pi_i(L) = 0$ for all $i$, but $L$ is not contractible, and thus $L \not\sim \pt$. However, the inclusion $\pt \injects L$ is a weak homotopy equivalence, which can not be a homotopy equivalence.
:::

:::{.definition title="$n\dash$connectivity"}
A space is said to be $n\dash$connected if $\pi_{\leq n} X = 0$.
Recall that a space is *simply connected* iff $\pi_1 X = 0$.
:::

# Theorems

:::{.theorem title="Higher homotopy groups are abelian"}
\[
n\geq 2 \implies [S^n, X] \in \Ab
\]
:::

:::{.theorem title="Hopf, 1931"}
\[
[S^3, S^2] = \ZZ \neq 0
\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Recall that *homology* vanishes above the dimension of a given manifold.
This group is generated by the *Hopf fibration*, and provides infinitely many ways of "wrapping" a 3-sphere around a 2-sphere nontrivially! This was surprising and unexpected.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Hurewicz"}
Given a fixed space $X$, any map $f \in \pi_kX = [S^k, X]$ has the type $f: S^k \to X$. This induces a map $f_*: H_* S^k \to H_* X$. Since $H_k S^k \cong \ZZ \cong \generators{\mu}$, define a family of maps
$$
h_k: \pi_k X \to H_k X \\
[f] \mapsto f_*(\mu)
$$

If $n\geq 2$ and $X$ is $n-1$ connected, then $h_k$ is an isomorphism for all $k\leq n$.

:::

:::{.remark}
If $k=1$, then $h_1$ is the abelianization of $\pi_1$.
:::

:::{.proposition title="Uniqueness up to homotopy of Eilenberg-MacLane spaces"}
If $X$ is a space with one nontrivial homology group $G$ in degree $k$, so that $X$ satisfies
$$\pi_i(X) = \cases{G,~i=k\\0,~\text{otherwise}}$$
Then $X \simeq K(G, k)$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Two spaces with isomorphic homotopy groups need not be homotopy-equivalent! 
This is an exception.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Hurewicz"}
Given a space $X$, define a family of maps
$$
 h_k: \pi_k X \to H_k X\\
 [f] \mapsto f_*(\mu_k)
$$
where $H_k X = \langle \mu_k \rangle$.

If $X$ is $n-1$ connected where $n\geq 2$, then $h_k$ is an isomorphism for all $k \leq n$.
In particular, $\pi_n X \cong H_n X$ as groups.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Freudenthal Suspension"}
If $X$ is an $n\dash$ connected CW complex, then there are maps $\pi_i X \to \pi_{i+1} \Sigma X$ which is an isomorphism for $i\leq 2n$ and a surjection for $i=2n+1$.
:::

:::{.remark}
We have a complete classification of (finitely generated) abelian groups, so we know $\pi_n(X) = F \oplus T$ for some free and torsion parts.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Cellular approximation"}
Any map $f: X \to Y$ is homotopic to a cellular map.
:::

:::{.example title="Application: low degree homotopy groups of spheres"}
$\pi_k S^n = 0$ if $k < n$. Use $f\in \pi_kS^n \iff f\in [S_k, S_n]$, deform $f$ to be cellular, then $f(S^k_{(k)}) \injects S^n_{(k)} = \pt$, so $f \homotopic c_0$, a constant map.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Whitehead"}
**Abbreviated statement**: if $X, Y$ are CW complexes, then any map $f: X \to Y$ is a *weak* homotopy equivalence if and only if it is a homotopy equivalence.
I.e., if $f: X\to Y$ is a weak equivalence between CW complexes, then it is a homotopy equivalence.

**Full Statement**: If $(X, x_0) \mapsvia{f} (Y, f(x_0))$ such that the induced maps
$$
f_*: \pi_*(X, x_0) \to \pi_*(Y, y_0) \\
 [g] \mapsto [f \circ g]
$$
are all isomorphisms and $Y$ is connected, then $f$ is a homotopy equivalence.
:::

:::{.remark}
$f$ must induce maps on all homotopy groups simultaneously.
:::

:::{.corollary title="Relative Whitehead"}
If $f:X\to Y$ between CW complexes induces an isomorphism $H_* X \cong H_* Y$, then $f$ is a weak equivalence.
:::

:::{.theorem title="CW Approximation"}
For every topological space $X$, there exists a CW complex $\tilde X$ and a weak homotopy equivalence $f: X \to \tilde X$.
Moreover, if $X$ is $n\dash$dimensional, $Y$ may be chosen to be $n\dash$connected and is obtained from $X$ by attaching cells of dimension greater than $n$.
:::

:::{.remark}
\envlist

- Weak equivalences = equivalences for CW complexes, which means we can essentially throw out the distinction!

- This says that if we understand CW complexes, we essentially understand the category $\ho\Top$ completely. Moreover, we only have to understand spaces up to *weak* equivalence, i.e. we just need to check induced maps on $\pi_*$ instead of checking for inverse maps.
:::

## Stabilization


:::{.remark}
\[
[S^k, X] \mapsto [\Sigma S^k, \Sigma X] = [S^{k+1}, \Sigma X]
.\]
An application: $\pi_2 S^2 = \pi_3 S^3 = \cdots$ since $2$ is already in the stable range.
A consequence: $\pi_1 X \to \pi_2 \Sigma X \to \pi_3 \Sigma^2 X \to \cdots$ is eventually constant, we say the homotopy groups **stabilize**. 
:::


:::{.definition title="Stable homotopy group"}
Define the **stable homotopy groups**
\[
\pi_i^S \definedas \lim_{k\to\infty} \pi_{i+k} X
\]
:::

:::{.remark}
Take $X = S^n$ to obtain *stable homotopy groups of spheres*.
:::




