# Wednesday February 26th

Example (regarding generalization from last time)
: Let $G = \prod^\infty \ZZ/p^n\ZZ$, which is a commutative pro-$p$ group.
  Then 
  $$\oplus \ZZ_p^n \ZZ ~(?)~\subsetneq G[\tors] \subsetneq G
  $$ 
  with proper containments, but the direct sum is dense in the direct product, so $G[\tors]$ is proper and dense and thus not closed.


## (Clark-Xarles) Local Bounds for Torsion Points on Abelian Varieties

> Recommended reading! Introduces a lot of tools in their most basic form.

Let $K/\QQ_p$ be a $p\dash$adic field with $[K: \QQ_p] = d$, $R$ a valuation ring, $\mfm$ a maximal ideal, $\FF_q = R/\mfm$.

> Recall previously: finiteness on torsion subgroups in certain cases.
> Mordell-Weil works for global fields, but what is that finite group?
> No positive results bounding the torsion for a Laurent series field, can be arbitrary large.


Let $A/K$ be a $g\dash$dimensional abelian variety and recall 

\begin{align*}
A(K) &\cong_{\mathrm{TopGrp}} (R, +)^g \oplus T \cong \ZZ_p^{dg} \oplus T
,\end{align*}
where $\abs{T} < \infty$

We'll prove bounds in three steps:

1. Good reduction
2. Potentially good reduction
3. General reduction and results in the case of *anisotropic reduction*.

## Good Reduction

Definition (Good Reduction for Abelian Varieties)
: $A/K$ has *good reduction* if there exists a smooth group scheme $A?R$ with generic fiber $A/K$.

Noting that $\spec(R) = \theset{(0), (\pi)}$ is a two point space, we have the fibers

\begin{tikzcd}
A \arrow[dd] &  & A/K \arrow[dd] &  & A/\FF_q \arrow[dd] \\
             &  &                &  &                    \\
\spec(R)     &  & (0)            &  & (\pi)             
\end{tikzcd}




We get a SES
$$
0 \to A' \to A(R) \mapsvia{\text{reduction}} A(\FF_q) \to 0
$$
and the fact that it is surjective is due to **Hensel's lemma**.
Here $A' = \mfm^g$ endowed with a formal group law.
Since we have a projective variety, we can clear denominators to replace $A(R)$ with $A(K)$ in the above sequence.
Note that the quotient is precisely a Mordell-Weil group, so using the Weil conjectures, we can say quite a bit about its size.

Thus $A' \injects A(K)$ is an open finite-index subgroup.
Moreover, all of the torsion is $p\dash$primary, and $A'[\tors] = A'[p^\infty]$.
Define $G[\tors]'$ to be the torsion that is prime to $p$.
If the kernel is $p\dash$primary torsion, then the reduction map induces an isomorphism 

\begin{align*}
r: A(K)[\tors]' \mapsvia{\cong} A(\FF_q)[\tors]'
.\end{align*}

Theorem (Weil, Serre. Improved Weil Bounds)
: $\# A(\FF_q) \leq \floor{ (1 + \sqrt q)^2}^g$.
  (Note that Weil's original bound is just this without the floor function.) 

Therefore, for $A/K$ and $K/\QQ$ a number field of degree $d$,
choose $\mfp_1, \mfp_2$ in $\spec \ZZ_k$ points of good reduction.
Then

\begin{align*}
\# A(K)[\tors] \leq \floor{ \qty{1+p_1^{\frac d 2}   }^2  }^g
\floor{ \qty{ 1 + p_2^{\frac d 2}  }^2  }
.\end{align*}

> Note: potentially "blah" always means "blah" after some base extension.

## Potentially Good Reduction

Definition (Potentially Good Reduction)
: Let $K$ be a $p\dash$adic field, then $A/K$ has *potentially good reduction* iff there exists a finite degree extension $L/K$ such that base extending to $L$, $A/L$, has good reduction.

Proposition
: $\# A(K)[\tors]' \leq \floor{\qty{1 + \sqrt q  }^2  }^g$.

Remark
: If $\endo(A)$ is "large enough", e.g. if $A$ has $X\dash$multiplication for $X = \CC, \HH$ (complex or quaternionic) then $A$ must have potentially good reduction (see Pete's thesis).

Proof
: Serre-Tate observed that if you have potentially good reduction, it can always be obtained via a totally ramified extension $L/K$.
  That is, if $S$ is the valuation ring of $L$ and $\mfm_S$ is its maximal ideal, then $S/\mfm_S \cong \FF_q$, so it doesn't change the size of the residue field.
  Applying step 1 over $L$ yields a bound.

Application
: If $E/\QQ$ is an elliptic curve with potentially good reduction over $2, 3$ (i.e. the $j\dash$invariant doesn't have 2 or 3 in the denominator).
  Applying the bound yields 

  \begin{align*}
  \# E(\QQ)[\tors] 
  &\leq \floor{(1 + \sqrt 2)^2  } \floor{ (1 + \sqrt 3)^2 } \\
  &= (5)(7) \\
  &= 35
  .\end{align*}

  Note that a much harder theorem yields a tighter bound at $15$, but this is much easier and not much worse of a bound.

  Taking now $A/\QQ$ with $\dim A = 2$ with the same conditions yields 
  $\# A(\QQ)[\tors]' \leq (35^2) = 1225$.

  Note that without this minor observation, the known bound is astronomically larger!

Theorem (C-Xarles)
: Fix $A/\QQ$ with $\dim A = 2$ and everywhere potentially good reduction.
  Then 
  $$
  \# A(\QQ)[\tors] \in [1, 16] \union [18, 20], \union \theset{22, 24, 25, 28, 30, 36, 48, 60, 72}
  $$

  Conversely, $[1, 10] \union \theset{12, 16, 18, 19 ,20, 24, 36}$ are known to occur.

> Note that for elliptic curves over $\QQ$, it's $\theset{1,2,4,6}$.

Proof (Sketch)
: For $K$ a $p\dash$adic field, the absolute unramified extension has galois group $\hat \ZZ$, then extend to $\bar K$ with galois group $H$ to obtain a SES
  $$
  1 \to H \to g_K \to \hat \ZZ \to 0
  $$
  Since $\hat \ZZ$ is a free profinite group, thus a projective object in that category of profinite groups, so this sequence splits and $g_K \cong \hat \ZZ \oplus H$.

  What does this buy us? 
  We can think of the subgroup $H$ now as a quotient, so there is a $K^{\mathrm{tr}} \leq \bar K$ such that $\Aut(K\tr/K) = H$, i.e. we have a compositum

  
  \begin{tikzcd}
                                  & \bar K \arrow[ldd, "H"'] \arrow[rdd] &                                \\
                                  &                                      &                                \\
  K^\text{unramified} \arrow[rdd] &                                      & K^{\text{tr}} \arrow[ldd, "H"] \\
                                  &                                      &                                \\
                                  & K                                    &                               
  \end{tikzcd}

  

  
  Thus $\bar K = K^{\text{unramified}} \cross K^{\text{tr}}$.


## General Reduction 

Let $A/K$ be an abelian variety, $A/R$ the Néron model, which is a smooth finite type group $R\dash$group scheme with generic fiber $A/K$ and $A(K) = A(R)$.
There is a reduction map $A' \to A(R) \mapsvia{r} A(\FF_1) \to 0$ given by reduction, which is again surjective by Hensel's lemma.

Here the kernel $A'$ is exactly as before, obtained by evaluating a $g\dash$dimensional formal group law on $\mfm^g$.
The difference here is that $A(\FF_q)$ is no longer an abelian variety, and instead the group of $\FF_q$ rational points of a commutative algebraic group over $\FF_q$.

There is structure theory of commutative algebraic groups, which may be disconnected, so we'll need to consider things like the component group -- but this can be arbitrarily large, which can be an issue.
