# Friday, January 15

## Review 

> See assignment posted on ELC, due Wed Jan 27

:::{.remark}
Recall that a chain complex is $C_\wait$ where $d^2 = 0$, and a map of chain complex is a ladder of commuting squares


\begin{tikzcd}
	\cdots & {C_{n-1}} & {C_{n}} & {C_{n+1}} & \cdots \\
	&& {} \\
	\cdots & {D_{n-1}} & {D_n} & {D_{n+1}} & \cdots
	\arrow["{u_{n-1}}", from=1-2, to=3-2]
	\arrow["{u_n}", from=1-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{u_{n+1}}", from=1-4, to=3-4]
	\arrow["{d_{n-1}}", from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{d_n}", from=1-3, to=1-4]
	\arrow["{d_{n-1}}", from=3-2, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{d_n}"', from=3-3, to=3-4]
	\arrow[from=1-4, to=1-5]
	\arrow[from=3-4, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-2]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-2]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMTEsWzEsMCwiQ197bi0xfSJdLFsyLDAsIkNfe259Il0sWzMsMCwiQ197bisxfSJdLFsyLDIsIkRfbiJdLFszLDIsIkRfe24rMX0iXSxbMSwyLCJEX3tuLTF9Il0sWzQsMCwiXFxidWxsZXQiXSxbNCwyLCJcXGJ1bGxldCJdLFswLDIsIlxcYnVsbGV0Il0sWzAsMCwiXFxidWxsZXQiXSxbMiwxXSxbMCw1LCJ1Il0sWzEsMywidV9uIl0sWzIsNCwidSJdLFswLDFdLFsxLDIsImRfbiJdLFs1LDNdLFszLDQsImRfbiIsMl0sWzIsNl0sWzQsN10sWzgsNV0sWzksMF1d)

Recall that $u_n: Z_n(C) \to Z_n(D)$ and $u_n: B_n(C) \to B_n(D)$ preserves these submodules, so there are induced maps $u_{\wait, n}: H_n(D) \to H_n(D)$ where $H_n(C) \da Z_n(C) / B_nn-1(C)$.
Moreover, taking $H_n(\wait)$ is a functor from $\Ch(\rmod) \to \rmod$ for any fixed $n$ and on objects $C\mapsto H_n(C)$ and chain maps $u_{n} \to H_n(u) \da u_{*, n}$.
Note the lower indices denote maps going down in degree.

:::

## Cohomology

:::{.definition title="Quasi-isomorphism"}
A chain map $u:C\to D$ is a **quasi-isomorphism** if and only if the induced map $u_{*, n}: H^n(C) \to H^n(D)$ is an isomorphism of \(R\dash\)modules.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that the usual notion of an isomorphism in the categorical sense might be too strong here.
:::

:::{.definition title="Cohomology"}
A **cochain complex** is a complex of the form
\[
\cdots 
\mapsvia{d^{n-2}}  C^{n-1}
\mapsvia{d^{n-1}}  C^{n}
\mapsvia{d^{n}}  C^{n+1}
\cdots
\]
where $d^n \circ d^{n-1} = 0$.
We similarly write $Z^n(C) \da \ker d^n$ and $B^n(C) \da \im d^{n-1}$ and write the \(R\dash\)module $H^n(C) \da Z^n/B^n$ for the $n$th **cohomology** of $C$.
:::

:::{.remark}
There is a way to go back and forth bw chain complexes and cochain complexes: set $C_n \da C^{-n}$ and $d_n \da d^{-n}$.
This yields 
\[
C^{-n} 
\mapsvia{d^{-n}} 
C^{-n+1} 
\iff C_n \mapsvia{d^n} C_{n-1}
,\]
and the notions of $d^2 = 0$ coincide.
:::

:::{.definition title="Bounded complexes"}
A cochain complex $C$ is **bounded** if and only if there exists an $a\leq b \in \ZZ$ such that $C_n \neq 0 \iff a\leq n \leq b$.
Similarly $C^n$ is bounded above if there is just a $b$, and **bounded below** for just an $a$.
All of the same definitions are made for cochain complexes.
:::

:::{.remark}
See the book for classical applications:

- 1.1.3: Simplicial homology
- 1.1.5: Singular homology

:::

## Operations on Chain Complexes

:::{.remark}
Write $\Ch$ for $\Ch(\rmod)$, then if $f,g: C\to D$ are chain maps then $f+g:C\to D$ can be defined as $(f+g)(x) = f(x) + g(x)$, since $D$ has an addition coming from its \(R\dash\)module structure.
Thus the hom sets $\Hom_{\Ch}(C, D)$ becomes an abelian group.
There is a distinguished **zero object**[^see_zero_objects]
$0$, defined as the chain complex with all zero objects and all zero maps.
Note that we also have a zero map given by the composition $(C \to 0) \circ (0\to D)$.

[^see_zero_objects]: 
See appendix A 1.6 for initial and terminal objects.
Note that $\emptyset$ is an initial but non-terminal object in $\Set$, whereas zero objects are both.


:::

:::{.definition title="Products and Coproducts"}
If $\ts{A_ \alpha}$ is a family of complexes, we can form two new complexes:

- The **product** $\qty{ \prod_ \alpha A_ \alpha}_n \da \prod_ \alpha A _{\alpha, n}$ with the differential 
\[
\qty{ \prod d_ \alpha}_n: \prod A _{\alpha, n} \mapsvia{d _{\alpha, n}} \prod A _{\alpha, n-1}
.\]

- The **coproduct** $\qty{ \coprod _{\alpha} A _{\alpha}}_n \da \bigoplus _{\alpha} A _{\alpha, n}$, i.e. there are only finitely many nonzero entries, with exactly the same definition as above for the differential.

:::

:::{.remark}
Note that if the index set is finite, these notions coincide.
By convention, finite direct products are written as direct sums.

These structures make $\Ch$ into an **additive category**.
See appendix for definition: the homs are abelian groups where composition distributes over addition, existence of a zero object, and existence of finite products.
Note that here we have arbitrary products.
:::

:::{.definition title="Subcomplexes"}
We say $B$ is a **subcomplex** of $C$ if and only if 

- $B_n \leq C_n \in \rmod$ for all $n$,
- The differentials of $B_n$ are the restrictions of the differentials of $C_n$.

:::

:::{.remark}
This can be alternatively stated as saying the inclusion $i: B\to C$ given by $i_n: B_n \to C_n$ is a morphism of chain complexes.
Recall that some squares need to commute, and this forces the condition on restrictions.
:::

:::{.definition title="Quotient Complexes"}
When $B \leq C$, we can form the quotient complex $C/B$ where 
\[
C_n/B_n \mapsvia{\bar{d_n}} C _{n-1} / B _{n-1}
.\]
Moreover there is a natural projection $\pi: C\to C/B$ which is a chain map.
:::

:::{.remark}
Suppose $f:B\to C$ is a chain map, then there exist induced maps on the levelwise kernels and cokernels, so we can form the **kernel** and **cokernel** complex:

\begin{tikzcd}
	\cdots && {\ker f_n} && {\ker f_{n-1}} && \cdots \\
	\\
	\cdots && {B_n} && {B_{n-1}} && \cdots \\
	\\
	\cdots && {C_n} && {C_{n-1}} && \cdots \\
	&&& {} & {} \\
	\cdots && {\cok f_n} && {\cok f_{n-1}} && \cdots
	\arrow["{d_n}", from=5-3, to=5-5]
	\arrow["{d_n}", from=3-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow["{\exists d_n}", dashed, from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow["{\exists d_n}", dashed, from=7-3, to=7-5]
	\arrow["{i_{n}}"{description}, from=1-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{f_n}"{description}, from=3-3, to=5-3]
	\arrow["{\pi_n}"{description}, from=5-3, to=7-3]
	\arrow["{f_{n-1}}"{description}, from=3-5, to=5-5]
	\arrow["{\pi_{n-1}}"{description}, from=5-5, to=7-5]
	\arrow["{i_{n-1}}"{description}, from=1-5, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=5-1, to=5-3]
	\arrow[from=7-1, to=7-3]
	\arrow[from=7-5, to=7-7]
	\arrow[from=5-5, to=5-7]
	\arrow[from=3-5, to=3-7]
	\arrow[from=1-5, to=1-7]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=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)

Here $\ker f \leq B$ is a subcomplex, and $\coker f$ is a quotient complex of $C$.
The chain map $i: \ker f\to B$ is a categorical kernel of $f$ in $\Ch$, and $\pi$ is similarly a cokernel. 
See appendix A 1.6.
These constructions make $\Ch$ into an **abelian category**: roughly an additive category where every morphism has a kernel and a cokernel.

:::


