# Wednesday, February 24

## Finishing the Proof of Balancing Tor

We were trying to prove that taking the left derived functors of the two slots in $\Tor$ yield the same thing.

> See the diagram from last time!

:::{.proof title="?"}
We'll need the following:

:::{.claim}
This induces a *quasi-isomorphism*
\[
P\tensor B \fromvia{1\tensor \eta} \Tor(P\tensor Q) \mapsvia{\eps \tensor \one} \Tot(A\tensor Q) = A\tensor Q
,\]
i.e. it is a morphism that induces an isomorphism on homology.
:::

Recall that by Corollary 1.5, a chain complex is a quasi-isomorphism if and only if the cone complex is acyclic/exact.
In degree $n$ of the total complex, the $n$th piece is the $n$th diagonal and we have
\[
(P_n \tensor Q_0)
\oplus \cdots \oplus 
(P_0 \tensor Q_n)
.\]
where $P_0 \mapsvia{\eps \tensor \one A \tensor Q_n}$.
Recall that for a map \( B_n \mapsvia{f} C_n \), the cone complex was given by

\begin{tikzcd}
	{B_{n-1}} & \oplus & {C_n} \\
	\\
	{B_{n-2}} & \oplus & {C_{n-1}}
	\arrow["{d^C}", from=1-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{-d^B}", from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{-f}"', from=1-1, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNixbMCwwLCJCX3tuLTF9Il0sWzAsMiwiQl97bi0yfSJdLFsyLDAsIkNfbiJdLFsyLDIsIkNfe24tMX0iXSxbMSwyLCJcXG9wbHVzIl0sWzEsMCwiXFxvcGx1cyJdLFsyLDMsImReQyJdLFswLDEsIi1kXkIiXSxbMCwzLCItZiIsMl1d)

Writing one term out explicitly, we have

\begin{tikzcd}
	{(P_{n-1}\tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-1}) \oplus Q_n} & \oplus && {A \tensor Q_n} \\
	\\
	{(P_{n-1}\tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-2}) \oplus Q_{n-1}} & \oplus && {A\tensor Q_{n-1}}
	\arrow["{-d^{\oplus}}", from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{\one\tensor d}", from=1-4, to=3-4]
	\arrow["{-(\eps \tensor \one)}"', from=1-1, to=3-4]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNixbMCwwLCIoUF97bi0xfVxcdGVuc29yIFFfMCkgXFxvcGx1cyBcXGNkb3RzIFxcb3BsdXMgKFBfMCBcXHRlbnNvciBRX3tuLTF9KSBcXG9wbHVzIFFfbiJdLFswLDIsIihQX3tuLTF9XFx0ZW5zb3IgUV8wKSBcXG9wbHVzIFxcY2RvdHMgXFxvcGx1cyAoUF8wIFxcdGVuc29yIFFfe24tMn0pIFxcb3BsdXMgUV97bi0xfSJdLFszLDAsIkEgXFx0ZW5zb3IgUV9uIl0sWzMsMiwiQVxcdGVuc29yIFFfe24tMX0iXSxbMSwwLCJcXG9wbHVzIl0sWzEsMiwiXFxvcGx1cyJdLFswLDEsIi1kXntcXG9wbHVzfSJdLFsyLDMsIlxcb25lXFx0ZW5zb3IgZCJdLFswLDMsIi0oXFxlcHMgXFx0ZW5zb3IgXFxvbmUpIiwyXV0=)

Call this complex (2).

\todo[inline]{Fix spacing}

On the other hand, consider the double complex obtained from $P\tensor Q$ by adjoining the shifted complex $(A\tensor Q)[1, 0]$[^mistake_in_sign] in column $i=-1$.
This has the effect of keeping the same complex but relabeling left-most column "in degree 0" into "degree $-1$.
Note that this negatives the leftmost vertical differentials $A\tensor Q_n \to A\tensor Q_{n-1}$.
Now call everything above the dotted line $C$.

[^mistake_in_sign]: 
The book may have the sign incorrect here.

Consider $\Tot(C)[-1]$, which in degree $n$ is $(\Tot(C))_{n-1}$ and since this was an odd shift, negates all of the signs of differential.
So in degree $n$, this explicitly looks like
\[
n:\quad (P_{n-1} \tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-1}) \oplus (A\tensor Q_n)\\ \\
n:\quad (P_{n-1} \tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-1}) \oplus (A\tensor Q_n)\\ \\
.\]

and we have

\begin{tikzcd}
	{(P_{n-1}\tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots } & {\oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-1})} & \oplus & {A \tensor Q_n} \\
	\\
	{(P_{n-1}\tensor Q_0) \oplus \cdots \oplus (P_0 \tensor Q_{n-2})} && \oplus & {A\tensor Q_{n-1}}
	\arrow["{-d^{\oplus}}", from=1-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{\one\tensor d}", from=1-4, to=3-4]
	\arrow["{-(\eps \tensor \one)}"', from=1-2, to=3-4]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNyxbMCwwLCIoUF97bi0xfVxcdGVuc29yIFFfMCkgXFxvcGx1cyBcXGNkb3RzICJdLFswLDIsIihQX3tuLTF9XFx0ZW5zb3IgUV8wKSBcXG9wbHVzIFxcY2RvdHMgXFxvcGx1cyAoUF8wIFxcdGVuc29yIFFfe24tMn0pIl0sWzMsMCwiQSBcXHRlbnNvciBRX24iXSxbMywyLCJBXFx0ZW5zb3IgUV97bi0xfSJdLFsxLDAsIlxcb3BsdXMgKFBfMCBcXHRlbnNvciBRX3tuLTF9KSJdLFsyLDAsIlxcb3BsdXMiXSxbMiwyLCJcXG9wbHVzIl0sWzAsMSwiLWRee1xcb3BsdXN9Il0sWzIsMywiXFxvbmVcXHRlbnNvciBkIl0sWzQsMywiLShcXGVwcyBcXHRlbnNvciBcXG9uZSkiLDJdXQ==)


Calling this complex (3), we have (3) = (2), so it suffices to show (2) is exact, i.e. $\Tot(C)$ is acyclic.
This follow from the next result we'll prove, the *acyclic assembly lemma*.
Note that if $Q_j$ is projective, then it's an algebra fact that $\wait \tensor_R Q_j$ is exact (not just right exact) since projective implies flat.
This implies that the rows of $C$ are exact, since this is taking a project resolution (which is exact) and tensoring with a flat module.
Using that $C$ is supported on the upper half-plane and has exact rows, by this part (3) of the acyclic assembly lemma, $\Tot^{\oplus}(C)$ will be acyclic.
A similar argument will go through to show that $\one\tensor\eta$ is also a quasi-isomorphism by adjoining $(P\tensor B)$ as the $-1$st row and applying a version of the lemma for right half-plane complexes with exact columns.
:::

## Acyclic Assembly Lemma

:::{.proposition title="Acyclic Assembly Lemma"}
Let $C$ be a double complex in $\modr$, then

- $\Tot^{\prod}(C)$ is acyclic if either

  1. $C$ is upper half-plane with exact columns, or
  2. $C$ is right half-plane with exact rows.

- $\Tot^{\oplus }(C)$ is acyclic if either

  3. $C$ is upper half-plane with exact rows[^upper_half_acyclic_assembly_use], or
  4. $C$ is right half-plane with exact columns.
  

[^upper_half_acyclic_assembly_use]: 
This is the part we used previously, and (4) is the one used for the other half of the argument.

:::

:::{.remark}
It suffices to prove (1).
Interchanging rows and columns by reflecting along the line $i=j$ interchanges the types showing up in (1) and (2), and doesn't change the total complex.
This similarly switches (3) and (4), so we have $1\implies 2$ and $4\implies 3$, so we'll show that $1\implies 4$.
Let $\tau_n C$ be the double complex obtained taking a *good truncation* of $C$ at level $n$:
\[
(\tau_n C)_{ij} \da
\begin{cases}
C_{ij} &  j > n
\\
\ker( d^v: C_{i, n} \to C_{i, n-1} & j=n.
\end{cases}
.\]
Up to translation $\tau_n C$ is a 1st quadrant complex, and since we're in case (4), we're assuming the columns are exact.
Now using (1), $\Tot^{\oplus }(\tau_n C)= \Tot^{\prod}(\tau_n C)$ since we now have a first quadrant complex and all diagonals are finite, and we can conclude both are exact.
This implies that $\Tot^{\oplus }C$ is acyclic since every cycle in $\Tot^{\oplus }(C)$ is nonzero in only finitely many terms.
Thus each such cycle is a cycle in $\Tot(\tau_n C)$ for some $n\ll 0$, and hence a boundary by the previous argument.
:::


:::{.remark}
Note that this argument does not go through for the direct product, since then there may be infinitely many nonzero terms on any diagonal, and not every cycle would be represented after some finite truncation and shift.
:::


:::{.proof title="of proposition"}
By translating $C$ left or right, it's enough to prove that $H_0 \Tot^{\prod }C = 0$.
We can write
\[
(\Tot^{\prod}C)_0 = \prod_{j \geq 0} C_{-j, j}
\ni
c\da 
(\cdots, c_{-j, j}, \cdots, c_{-2, 2}, c_{-1, 1}, c_{0, 0} )
,\]
letting the latter element by a 0-cycle.
By inducting on $j$, we'll construct an element $b$ such that $b_{-j, j+1} \in C_{-j, j+1} \subseteq (\Tot^{\prod} C)_1$ such that 
\[
d^v( b_{-j, j+1}) + d^h( b_{-j+1, j}) = c_{-j, j}
,\]
which will make $c$ a boundary.
:::





