# Friday, April 30

## Proof Continued

:::{.remark}
Last time: we were proving the bijection between $H^2(\lieg; M)$ and extensions of $\lieg$ by $M$ up to equivalence.
:::

:::{.proof title="of the classification theorem, continued"}
We chose a vector space splitting \( \lieg \mapsvia{j} E \) and used the Cartan-Eilenberg resolution to construct a 2-cocycle $w\in \Hom_{\kmod}(\Extalg^2 \lieg, M)$ given by 
\[
w(x, y) \da [jx, jy] - j[x, y] && x,y\lieg
,\]
and we saw that $d(w) = 0$.
Say we change $j$ to $j': \lieg \to E$ to $j': \lieg \to E$ with $\pi j' = \one_{\lieg}$, and let $w'$ be the corresponding 2-cocycle.
Letting \( \alpha \da j-j' \), then \( \pi \circ \alpha = 0 \) by linearity and so \( \alpha : \lieg\to \ker \pi = M \) and thus \( \alpha\in\Hom_{\kmod}(\Extalg^1 \lieg, M) \).
We then have 
\[
\delta \alpha (x, y)
&= x \alpha(y) - y \alpha(x) - \alpha([xy]) \\
&= [j'x, j'y - jy] - [jy, j'x - jx]-j'[xy] + j[xy] \\ 
&= \qty{ [j'x, j'y] - j'[xy] } - [j'x, jy] + [j'x, jy] - \qty{[jx, jy] - j[xy] } \\
&= \qty{ [j'x, j'y] - j'[xy] } - \qty{[jx, jy] - j[xy] } \\
&= w'(x, y) - w(x, y)
,\]
so \( \delta\alpha = w' -w\).
So their difference is a coboundary, yielding $w = w' \in H^2(\lieg, M)$, making this construction independent of the choice of $j$.


:::{.exercise title="?"}
Show that equivalent extensions also lead to the same element in $H^2$.
:::

This yields a well-defined map 
\[
\ts{ \text{Extensions of $\lieg$ by $M$ } } &\to H^2(\lieg; M) \\
(0\to M\to E\to \lieg\to 0) &\mapsto w
.\]
Conversely, given a 2-cocycle $\tilde w\in\Hom_{\kmod}(\Extalg^2 \lieg, M)$ with $M$ abelian, define

- $E \da M \oplus \lieg \in \Vect_k$
- A bracket using the following rules (identifying $M, \lieg$ with their images in $E$):
  - $[m, n]_E \da 0$
  - $[x, m]_E \da x\cdot m = -[m, x]_E$
    - Note that this guarantees that the actions agree.
  - $[x, y]_E \da \tilde w(x, y) + [x, y]_\lieg$

One can check that the last definition is anticommutative since $w$ was alternating, and further that this makes $E$ into a Lie algebra that fits into a SES of the desired form with canonical maps $i, \pi, j$.
The cocycle $w$ coming from this extension is given by 
\[ 
w(x, y) 
&= [x, y]_E - [x, y]_\lieg \\
&= \tilde w(x, y) + [x, y]_\lieg - [x, y]_{\lieg} \\
&= \tilde w(x, y)
\]
where here $j$ is a direct sum inclusions that we'll suppress.
So $H^2 \to \Ext/\sim \to H^2$ is the identity.
One can similarly check that $\Ext/\sim \to H^2 \to \Ext/\sim$ is also the identity, since it produces an equivalent extension.
So this defines a bijection of sets.
:::

:::{.remark}
This was known much earlier for group cohomology: if $G \in \Grp, A\in \gmod$, there is a bijection
\[
\ts{ 0\to A\to E \mapsvia{\pi} G \to 1 } 
\da 
\ts{ \text{Equivalence classes of extensions of $G$ by $A$ } }
&\to 
H^2(G; A) 
,\]
where $G$ may not be abelian, and one acts by conjugation instead.
Analogy: bracketing is like the differential of conjugation.
:::

## Proof Backlog from Monday

:::{.remark}
Recall Whitehead's Lemma 2[^weibel_whitehead_cor]
for $\lieg$ finite-dimensional and semisimple over $\ch(k) = 0$ and $M\in \liegmod^\fd$, then $H^2(\lieg; M) = 0$.

[^weibel_whitehead_cor]: 
Weibel corollary 7.8.12

:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
By Weyl's theorem, $M$ is a direct sum of simple $\lieg\dash$modules and $H^*$ commutes with direct sums, so it suffices to show this when $M$ is simple.
By Weibel theorem 7.8.9 (structure of semisimple Lie algebras using the Casimir operator) we have $H^n(\lieg; M) = 0$ for $M\neq k$ and for all $n$, so we reduce to showing this for $M=k$.
By the classification theorem, we need to show that every extension of the following form splits:
\[
0\to k\to E \mapsvia{\pi} \lieg \to 0
,\]
where we view $k \in \liealg^\ab$.
We proceed in an unanticipated way by reducing Lie algebra maps to $\lieg\dash$module maps.
\

First note that $k \subset Z\lieg$, since \( E \cong k \oplus \lieg \in \Vect_k \), so there is an embedding \( \lieg \injects E \) where say $x\mapsto \tilde x$.
For $c\in k$ and $x\in \lieg$, we have $[\tilde x, c] \da x\cdot c = 0$ since $k \in \liealg^\ab$, and by linearity this will show that $k$ commutes with everything.
We now make $E$ into a $\lieg\dash$module by defining $x\cdot e \da [\tilde x, e]$ for $x\in \lieg, e\in E$.
If $\tilde x'$ is another other representative in $E$ of $x$, then noting that $k \in \ker \pi$ we can write $\tilde x' = [\tilde x + c, e] = [\tilde x, e]$ using that $c\in Z(E)$.
This action makes $\pi$ into a $\lieg\dash$module map, and we have
\[
\pi(x\cdot e) 
&\da \pi( [\tilde x, e] ) \\
&= [\pi(\tilde x), \pi(e) ] && \pi \in \liealg(\lieg, E) \\
&\da [x, \pi(e)] \\
&\da x\cdot \pi(e) \in \lieg
,\]
since this is acting via the adjoint action.
By Weyl's theorem, both $E$ and $\lieg$ decompose into direct sums of simple $\lieg\dash$modules.
Using that $j$ is injective and a $\lieg\dash$module map, it must send simple submodules of $\lieg$ to simple submodules of $E$, using that maps to (from?) simple modules are either zero or isomorphisms and a dimension count.
One can check (easily!) that there is a $\lieg\dash$module map \( \sigma: \lieg \injects E \) such that $E \cong K \oplus \sigma(\lieg) \in \liegmod$.
So choose $\tilde x \da \sigma(x)$, then $\sigma \in \liealg(\lieg, E)$, and so
\[
\sigma( [x, y] )
&\da x \cdot \sigma(y) \\
&= [\tilde x, \sigma(y) ] \\
&= [\sigma(x), \sigma(y)]
,\]
making $\sigma(\lieg) \leq E$ a Lie-subalgebra.
Since $\sigma(\lieg) \cong \lieg$, this is precisely a semidirect product and we obtain $E \cong k \semidirect \lieg$, and the sequence splits as desired.
:::

:::{.remark}
Next time: Levi's theorem.
:::
