# Tuesday July 14th

:::{.remark}
\hfill
- The KL basis can be complicated -- you can compute them recursively, but may need to subtract off "constant coefficients" to obtain self-dual elements.
- There are no closed formulas in general.
- For any $P\in ! + q \ZZ^{\geq 0}[q]$ there exists an $m\in \ZZ$ such that $v^m P(v^{-2})$ occurs as a KL-polynomial.
- **The KL Positivity Conjecture**: 
  $h_{x, w} \in \ZZ^{\geq 0} [v]$, and in fact these non-negative coefficients can be realized as the graded dimension of the local intersection cohomology of Schubert varieties.
:::

## Why care about KL Positivity?

Set 
\[
\lieg = \liesl(n, \CC) = \theset{A\in \CC^{n\times n} \suchthat \tr(A) = 0}\\
\text{with } 
[AB] = AB - BA
.\]

The case of finite-dimensional representations is well understood, since everything decomposes into simple modules.
In the infinite case, we consider the principal block of category $\OO$, denoted $\OO_0(\lieg)$.

There is a correspondence
\begin{tikzcd}
\correspond{\text{Simple modules in } \OO_0}  & \ar[l] S_n \ar[r] & \correspond{\text{Verma modules in }\OO_0} \\
\parbox{3cm}{\centering Weight modules $L(w)$ } & \ar[l] w \ar[r] & \Delta(w)
\end{tikzcd}

The **KL-multiplicity conjecture** states 
\[ 
[\Delta(w) : L(x)] = h_{x, w}(1)
,\] 
where the LHS counts how often $L(x)$ occurs as a subquotient in a composition series for $\Delta(w)$.
Determining the characters $\ch L(w)$ can be done using translation functors, and corresponds to determining the characters of all simple highest weight modules (not necessarily finite-dimensional), and is a vast generalization of Weyl's character formula.

This was the birth of geometric representation theory, and the proof involved $D\dash$modules, perverse sheaves, and Deligne's proof of the Weil conjectures.

**Goal**: 
categorify $\mch_n(S_n)$, the associative unital $\ZZ[v, v\inv]\dash$algebra given by $\gens{\theset{H_i \suchthat i\leq n-1}}$ subject to
\[
H_{s_{i+1}}
H_{s_{i}}
H_{s_{i+1}} &= 
H_{s_{i+1}}
H_{s_{i}}
H_{s_{i+1}} \\
H_{s_{i}}
H_{s_{j}}
&=
H_{s_{j}}
H_{s_{i}} 
&& \abs{i-j} \geq 2 \\
H_{s_{i}}^2 &= (v\inv - v) H_{s_i} + 1
.\]

Or equivalently, setting $C_{s_i} = H_{s_i} + v$,
\[
C_{s_{i+1}}
C_{s_{i}}
C_{s_{i+1}}  + C_{s_i} &= 
C_{s_{i+1}}
C_{s_{i}}
C_{s_{i+1}} + C_{s_{i+1}} \\
C_{s_{i}}
C_{s_{j}}
&=
C_{s_{j}}
C_{s_{i}}  
&&\abs{i-j} \geq 2 \\
C_{s_{i}}^2 
&= (v\inv - v) H_{s_i} + 1
.\]

:::{.remark}
The presentation above can be "lifted" to a categorical level.
So we want to find a category $\mca$ which is additive, monoidal, graded, and abelian such that

- $K_0^\oplus(\mca) \cong H(S_n)$ is an isomorphism of $\ZZ[v, v\inv]\dash$algebras.
- There are objects $B_{s_i}$ such that

\[  
1. && B_{s_i} \tensor B_{s_i} &\cong B_{s_i}(1) \oplus B_{s_i}(-1) \\
2. && B_{s_j} \tensor B_{s_i} &\cong B_{s_i} \tensor B_{s_j} && \text{ for } \abs{i-j} \geq 2 \\
3. && B_{s_i} \tensor B_{s_{i+1}} \tensor B_{s_i} \oplus B_{s_{i+1}} &\cong B_{s_{i+1}} \tensor B_{s_{i}} \tensor B_{s_{i+1}} \oplus B_{s_{i}}
.\]

:::


Question 1: What are the objects $B_{s_i}$? 
Set $R = \CC[x_1, \cdots, x_n]$ with $\abs{x_i} = 2$, yielding a graded $\CC\dash$algebra where $s_i$ permutes $x_i, x_{i+1}$.
We can look at the invariant ring, 
\[
R^{s_i} \definedas \theset{f\in R \suchthat s_i f = f}
\]
and note that $R$ and any of its shifts are modules over this ring.
So set, 
\[
B_{s_i} \definedas R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R(-1)
\]
which is a graded $R\dash$bimodule.

:::{.proposition title="?"}
We have an isomorphism of $R\dash$bimodules satisfying the desired relations.
:::

:::{.claim}
$R\cong R^{s_i}(2) \oplus R^{s_i}$ as graded $R^{s_i}\dash$bimodules.
:::


:::{.proof}
It suffices to show that every $f\in R$ can be written uniquely as 
\[
f = g(x_i - x_{i+1}) + h  \text{  with } g, h \in R^{s_i}
.\]
\

**Uniqueness**: 
If $f =g'(x_i - x_{i+1}) + h'$ then
\[
g'(2x_i - 2x_{i+1}) 
&= f - s_i f \\
&= g(x_i - x_{i+1}) - g(x_{i+1} - x_i)  \\
&= g(x_i - x_{i+1} - x_{i+1} + x_i) \\
&= g(2x_i - 2x_{i+1})
.\]

Since this is an integral domain, $g=g'$, and
\[
h = f - g (x_i - x_{i+1}) = f - g'(x_i - x_{i+1}) = h'
.\]

**Existence**:
$x_k \in R^{s_i}$ is $s_i$ invariant if $k\neq i, i+1$, and
\[
x_i = {1\over 2}\qty{ x_i - x_{i+1}} + {1\over 2}\qty{x_i + x_{i+1}} \in R^{s_i} \qty{\cdots} + R^{s_i}  \\
x_{i+1} = -{1\over 2}\qty{ x_i - x_{i+1}} + {1\over 2}\qty{x_i + x_{i+1}} \in R^{s_i} \qty{\cdots} + R^{s_i}  \\
.\]

So every $f\in R$ can be expressed as a polynomial in $x_i - x_{i+1}$ with coefficients in $R^{s_i}$.
Since $\qty{x_i - x_{i+1}}^2 \in R^{s_i}$, any polynomial in $x_i - x_{i+1}$ with coefficients in $R^{s_i}$ can be written as $g(x_i - x_{i+1}) + h$ with $g, h \in R^{s_i}$.
This proves the claim.

We can now check
\[
B_{s_i} \tensor_R B_{s_i} 
&=
\qty{R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R} \tensor_R 
\qty{R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R}(-2) \\
&\cong R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R(-2) \\
&\cong R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} \qty{ R^{s_i}(2) \oplus R^{s_i}  } \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R(-2) \\
&\cong R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} \qty{ R^{s_i}(2)   } \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R(-2)  \oplus
R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} \qty{ R^{s_i}  } \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R(-2) \\
&\cong R \tensor_{R^{s_i}} R \oplus R\tensor_{R^{s_i}} R(-2) \\
&\cong B_{s_i}(1) \oplus B_{s_i}(-1)
.\]
:::


## Soergel's Dream

Come up with a purely algebraic proof of the KL conjecture (without using machinery from geometric representation theory).
Consider the center of category $O$, $Z(\OO_0)$, the endomorphism ring of the identity functor.
It can be shown that this is isomorphic to the coinvariant ring $\CC[x_1, \cdots, x_{n+1}] / \CC[x_1, \cdots, x_{n+1}]^{S^n}$.
Thus invariant theory is "hidden" in the category $\OO_0(\lieg)$.

> Proved originally, but used some decomposition theory. 
> Recent proof from Elias Williams? Using hodge structures.

**Question**:
What is the category $\mca$?


:::{.definition title="Bott-Samelson Bimodules"}
Take $R\dash\grdim$, the category of graded $R\dash$bimodules, which is finitely generated as both left/right $R\dash$modules.
This is additive, monoidal, and graded, but this category is too big.
So we carve out a smaller subcategory.

For $w\in S_n$, write the formal word $\bar w = s_{i_1} \cdots s_{i_r}$ a reduced expression for $w$.
Note that this depends on which reduced expression is used.
Now define
\[
BS(\bar w) 
&\definedas \bigotimes^{j\leq r}{}_{R^{s_{i_j}}} \,\,B_{s_{i_j}}  && BS(\emptyset) = R \\
&\cong R \tensor_{R^{s_{i_1}}} R \tensor \cdots \tensor_{R^{s_{i_r}}} R
\]
where the isomorphism is canonical.
This is the **Bott-Samelson bimodule**.

:::

:::{.definition title="?"}
\hfill
- A Soergel bimodule is a direct summand of a finite sum of grading shifts of Bott-Samelson bimodules.
- The category $\mathbf{SBim}$ of Soergel bimodules is the strictly full subcategory of $R\dash\grdim$ consisting of Soergel bimodules.
- Equivalently, the smallest full subcategory of $R\dash\grdim$ consisting of $R, B_{s_i}$ and closed under $\tensor_R, \oplus, (i)$ and taking direct summands.
:::

:::{.remark}
The category $\mathbf{SBim}$ is additive, monoidal, and graded, but **not** abelian.
:::

:::{.definition title="Indecomposable"}
Recall that a module $X$ is **indecomposable** $\iff$ $X \cong A\oplus B$ implies $A\cong 0$ or $B\cong 0$.
:::

:::{.definition title="Krull-Schmidt"}
A category $\mathcal{C}$ is **Krull-Schmidt** $\iff$ every object decomposes uniquely into a *finite* direct sum of indecomposable objects.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
\hfill

1. $\mathbf{SBim}$ is *Krull-Schmidt*.

  > Note that such uniqueness here means that if $\bigoplus_{i=1}^r X_i \cong \bigoplus_{i=1}^s Y_i$ then $r=s$ and there is some permutation $\pi \in S_r$ such that $X_{\pi(i)} \cong Y_i$.

2. There is a bijection
\[
S_n &\tofrom \correspond{\text{Indecomposable Soergel bimodules} }/ \text{\tiny Isomorphism and shifts} \\
w &\mapsto B_w
.\]

  Moreover $\theset{ S[B_w] \suchthat w\in S_n }$ form a basis of $K_0^\oplus(\mathbf{SBim})$ as $\ZZ[v, v\inv]\dash$modules.

3. There is a $\ZZ[v, v\inv]\dash$algebra morphism
\[
c: \mch(S_n) &\mapsvia{\cong} K_0^\oplus(\mathbf{SBim}) \\
C_{s_i} &\mapsto [B_{s_i}]
.\]
:::

:::{.remark}
This implies both the KL positivity and multiplicity conjectures.
The KL basis corresponds to the basis given by the indecomposable Soergel bimodules.
:::
    


