# Wednesday, September 16

## Group Schemes

:::{.definition title="Representable Functors"}
Let $F:: \kalg \to \sets$ be a functor, then $F$ is **representable** iff $F(R)$ corresponds to "solutions to equations in $R$".
:::

:::{.example}
Let $F(\wait) = \SL(2, \wait)$, then the corresponding equations are $\det (x_{ij})  = 1$.
:::

If $F$ is representable, there is a correspondence $F(R) \cong \hom_R(A, R)$.
In the above example, $$A = k[x_{11}, x_{12}, x_{21}, x_{22}] / \gens{x_{11} x_{22} - x_{12}x_{21}},$$ which is exactly the coordinate algebra.

:::{.definition title="Affine Group Scheme"}
An *affine group scheme* is a representable functor $F:\kalg\to\Groups$.
:::

Suppose $G$ is an affine group scheme, and let $A = k[G]$ be the representing object.
Then there is a correspondence
\[  
G\dash\text{modules} \iff k[G]\dual\dash\text{modules}
.\]

For $G$ reductive, the RHS is equivalent to $\Dist(G)\dash$modules.

:::{.definition title="Finite Group Schemes"}
$G$ is a **finite** group scheme iff $k[G]$ is finite dimensional.
:::

If $G$ is finite, then $A\dual \cong k[G]\dual$ is a cocommutative Hopf algebras.
Thus representations for *finite* group schemes are equivalent to representations for finite-dimensional cocommutative Hopf algebras.

> On group scheme side: see reduction, spectral sequences, conceptual arguments.
> On the algebra side: have bases, underlying vector space, can do concrete computations.
> Can take $\spec \qty{k[G]}\dual$ to recover a group scheme.

## Hopf Algebras

For $A$ a $\kalg$, we have a multiplication and a unit, which can be defined in terms of diagrams.
To categorically reverse arrows, we can ask for a comultiplication and a counit. 
\[  
\Delta: A &\to A^{\tensor 2}
\\ \\
\epsilon: A &\to k 
.\]

We'll want another map,  an *antipode*
\[  
s: A\to A
.\]


The comultiplication should satisfy
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
A^{\tensor 3} & \ar[l, "1\tensor A"] A^{\tensor 2} \\
A^{\tensor 2}\ar[u, "\Delta \tensor 1"] & \ar[l, "\Delta"]\ar[u, "\Delta"] A
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}


The counit should satisfy
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
k\tensor \ar[d, "\cong"] A & \ar[l, "{\eps\tensor 1}"] A^{\tensor 2}\\
A\ar[r, "\cong"] & A\ar[u, "\Delta"]
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}

And the antipode should satisfy
\begin{center}
\begin{tikzcd}
A & A\ar[l, "{m(s\tensor 1)}"] \\
A\ar[u] & A\ar[l, "\eps"] \ar[u, "\Delta"]
\end{tikzcd}
\end{center}

### Module Constructions
Let $A$ be a Hopf algebra.


1. For $A\dash$modules $M, N$, we can form the $A\dash$module $M\tensor_k N$ with
\[  
\Delta(a) &= \sum a_i \tensor a_j \\ \\
a(m\tensor n) &= \sum a_1 m \tensor a_2 n
.\]

2. If $M$ is finite-dimensional over $A$, then $M\dual = \hom_k(M, k) \ni f$ is an $A\dash$module, and we can define $(af)(x) \da f(s(a)x)$ for $a\in A, x\in M$.


:::{.example}
$A = kG$ the group algebra on a group is a Hopf algebra:
\[  
\Delta: A &\to A^{\tensor 2} \\
g &\mapsto g\tensor g
.\]

The module action is diagonal, namely $g(m\tensor n) = gm \tensor gn$.
The antipode is given by $s(g) = g^{-1}$, and the unit is $\eps(g) = 1$ for all $g\in G$.
:::

:::{.example}
Let $A = U(\lieg)$, the universal enveloping algebra for $\lieg$ a Lie algebra.
Recall that $\lieg\dash$modules are equivalent to $U(\lieg)\dash$modules (unitary representations, some big associative algebra).
Then $A$ is a Hopf algebra, with $\Delta(\ell) = \ell\tensor 1 + 1\tensor \ell$ for $\ell \in \lieg$.
The unit is $\eps(\ell) = 0$, and the antipode is $s(\ell) = -\ell$.
:::

:::{.example}
Take the additive group $\GG_a$, then $A = k[\GG_a] \cong k[x]$ is a commutative Hopf algebra with $\Delta(x) = x\tensor 1 + 1\tensor x$, $\eps(x) = 0, s(x) = -x$.
:::

:::{.example}
For $\GG_m$, we have $A = k[\GG_m] \cong k[x, x^{-1}], \eps(x) = 1, s(x) = x^{-1}$.
:::



## Frobenius Kernels

Let $G$ be an algebraic group (scheme) over $k$, where $\ch(k) = p$.
Let $F:G\to G$ be the Frobenius, where e.g.
\[  
F:\GL(n, \wait) &\to \GL(n, \wait)\\
(x_{ij}) & \mapsto (x_{ij}^p)
.\]

Then $F$ is a map of group schemes.

:::{.definition title="Frobenius Kernels"}
$G_r \da \ker F^r$, where $F^r \da F\circ F \circ \cdots \circ F$ is the $r\dash$fold composition of the Frobenius.

This yields a nesting $G_1 \normal G_2 \normal G_3 \cdots \leq G$.
:::

Recall that
\[  
\Dist(G) = \gens{ {x_\alpha^n \over n!}, {y_\beta^m \over m!}, {H_i \choose k} }
.\]

We get a chain of finite dimensional algebras
\[  
\Dist(G_1) \leq \Dist(G_2) \leq \cdots \leq \Dist(G)
\]
where
\[  
\Dist(G_1) = \gens{ {x_\alpha^n \over n!}, {y_\beta^m \over m!}, {H_i \choose k} \st 0\leq n,m,k \leq p-1 }
,\]

where in general $\Dist(G_\ell)$ goes up to $p^{\ell} - 1$.
Recall that $G_r$ representations were equivalent to $\Dist(G_r)$ representations.


Some basic questions (Curtis, Steinberg, 1960s):

1. What are the simple modules for Frobenius kernels?
  I.e., what are the irreducible representations for $G_r$?

2. How are the representations for $G_r$ related to those for $G$?

> It turns out the representations for $G_r$ will lift to representations to $G$.
  Use "twisted tensor product" (Steinberg).

:::{.remark}
It turns out that $G_1$ is special.
\[  
\Dist(G_1) \cong u(\lieg) \da U(\lieg) / \gens{x^p - x^{[p]}}
,\]
where $\lieg = \mathrm{Lie}(G)$ is a *restricted lie algebra* (N. Jacobson).
Note that for $D\in \lieg$ a derivation, we define $D^{[p]} \da D\circ \cdots \circ D$ is the $p\dash$fold composition.

$G_1\dash$modules are equivalent to $\lieg\dash$modules which are *restricted* in the sense that
\[  
\rho: g &\to \liegl(V) \\
x^{[p]} &\mapsto \rho(x)^p
.\]
:::

