# Tuesday August 15th

> See Folland's Real Analysis, definitely a recommended reference.

Possible first day question: how can we "measure" a subset of $\RR$? 
We'd like bigger sets to have a higher measure, we wouldn't want removing points to increase the measure, etc.
This is not quite possible, at least something that works on *all* subsets of $\RR$. 
We'll come back to this in a few lectures.

## Notions of "smallness" in $\RR$

**Definition**:
Let $E$ be a set, then $E$ is *countable* if it is in a one-to-one correspondence with $E' \subseteq \NN$, which includes $\emptyset, \NN$.

**Definition**:
A set $E$ is *meager* (or of *1st category*) if it can be written as a countable union of **nowhere dense** sets.

*Exercise*:
Show that any finite subset of $\RR$ is meager.

Intuitively, a set is *nowhere dense* if it is full of holes. Recall that a $X \subseteq Y$ is dense in $Y$ iff the closure of $X$ is all of $Y$. 
So we'll make the following definition:

**Definition**:
A set $A \subseteq \RR$ is *nowhere dense* if every interval $I$ contains a subinterval $S \subseteq I$ such that $S \subseteq A^c$.


Note that a *finite* union of nowhere dense sets is also nowhere dense, which is why we're giving a name to such a *countably infinite* union. 

*Example:* 
$\QQ$ is an infinite, countable union of nowhere dense sets that is not itself nowhere dense.

Equivalently,

- $A^c$ contains a dense, open set.
- The interior of the closure is empty.

We'd like to say a set is *measure zero* exactly when it can be covered by intervals whose lengths sum to less than $\varepsilon$ for any $\varepsilon > 0$.

**Definition**: 
$E$ is a *null set* (or has *measure zero*) if $\forall \varepsilon >0$, there exists a sequence of intervals $\theset{I_j}_{j=1}^\infty$ such that
$$
E \subseteq \union_{j=1}^\infty \text{ and } \sum \abs{I_j} < \varepsilon.
$$(A second proof of A):

*Exercise*:
Show that a countable union of null sets is null.

We have several relationships

- Countable $\implies$ meager, but not the converse.
- Countable $\implies$ null, but not the converse.

*Exercise*:
Show that the "middle third" Cantor set is not countable, but is both null and meager. 
Key point: the Cantor set does not contain any intervals.


**Theorem**:
Every $E \subseteq \RR$ can be written as $E = A \disjoint B$ where $A$ is null and $B$ is meager.


> This gives some information about how nullity and meagerness interact -- in particular, $\RR$ itself is neither meager nor null.
> Idea: if meager $\implies$ null, this theorem allows you to write $\RR$ as the union of two null sets. This is bad!

*Proof*:
We can assume $E = \RR$. 
Take an enumeration of the rationals, so $\QQ = \theset{q_j}_{j=1}^\infty$. 
Around each $q_j$, put an interval around it of size $1/2^{j+k}$ where we'll allow $k$ to vary, yielding multiple intervals around $q_j$. 

To do this, define 
$$
I_{j, k} = (q_j - 1/2^{j+k}, q_j + 2^{j+k})
.$$ 
Now let $G_k = \union_j I_{j, k}$. 
Finally, let $A = \intersect_k G_k$; we claim that $A$ is null.

Note that $\sum_j \abs{I_{j, k}} = \frac{1} {2^k}$, so just pick $k$ such that $\frac 1 {2^k} < \varepsilon$.

Now we need to show that $A^c \definedas B$ is meager. 
Note that $G_k$ covers the rationals, and is a countable union of open sets, so it is dense. 
So $G_k$ is an open and dense set. By one of the equivalent formulations of meagerness, this means that $G_k^c$ is nowhere dense. 

But then 
$$
B = \union_k G_k^c
$$ 
is meager.

## $\RR$ is not small

**Theorem A**:
$\RR$ is not countable.

**Theorem B (Baire Category)**:
$\RR$ is not meager.

**Theorem C**:
$\RR$ is not null.

Note that theorems B and C imply theorem A. 
You can also replace $\RR$ with any nonempty interval $I = [a,b]$ where $a< b$, which is a strictly stronger statement -- if any subset of $\RR$ is not countable, then certainly $\RR$ isn't, and so on.

*Proof of (A):*
Begin by thinking of $I = [0,1]$, then every number here has a unique binary expansion. 
So we are reduced to showing that the set of all Bernoulli sequences (infinite length strings of 0 or 1) is uncountable. 

Then you can just apply the usual diagonalization argument by assuming they are countable, constructing the table, and flipping the diagonal bits to produce a sequence differing from every entry.
$\qed$

*A second proof of (A)*
Take an interval $I$, and suppose it is countable so $I = \theset{x_i}$. 
Choose $I_1 \subseteq I$ that avoids $x_1$, so $x_1\not\in I_1$. 
Choose $I_2 \subseteq I_1$ avoiding $x_2$ and so on to produce a nested sequence of closed intervals. 

Since $\RR$ is complete, the intersection $\intersect_{n=1}^\infty I_n$ is nonempty, so say it contains $x$. 

But then $x\in I_1 \in I$, for example, but $x\neq x_i$ for any $i$, so $x\not\in I$, a contradiction. 
$\qed$

*Proof of (B):*
Suppose $I = \union_{i=1}^\infty A_n$ where each $A_n$ is nowhere dense. 
We'll again construct a nested sequence of closed sets. 
Let $I_1 \subseteq I$ be a subinterval that misses all of $A_1$, so $A_1 \intersect I_1 = \emptyset$ using the fact that $A_1$ is nowhere dense. 

Repeat the same process, let $I_2 \subset I_1 \setminus A_2$. 
By the nested interval property, there is some $x\in \intersect A_i$.
$\qed$

> Note that we've constructed a meager set here, so this argument shows that the **complement of any meager subset of $\RR$ is nonempty**. 
> Setting up this argument in the right way in fact shows that this set is dense! Taking the contrapositive yields the usual statement of Baire's Category Theorem.

## Discontinuities

Consider the Thomae function: it is continuous on $\QQ$, but discontinuous on $\RR\setminus\QQ$. 
Can this be switched to get some function $f$ that is continuous on $\RR\setminus \QQ$ and discontinuous on $\QQ$? 

The answer is no.
The set of discontinuities of a function is *always* an $F_\sigma$ set, and $\RR\setminus \QQ$ is not an $F_\sigma$ set.
Equivalently, the rationals are not a $G_\delta$ set.

Let $D_f$ denote the set of discontinuities of $f$.

**Some facts:**

- For The pointwise limit of continuous functions, $D_f$ is meager.

- If $f$ is integrable, $D_f$ is null.

- If $f$ is monotone, $D_f$ is countable.

- There is a continuous nowhere differentiable function: 

  - Let 
  $$
  f(x) = \sum_n \frac{\norm{10^n x}}{10^n},
  $$ 
  and in fact *most* functions are like this.

- If $f$ is continuous and monotone, $D_f$ is null.

**Theorem**:
Let $I = [a,b]$.
Then
$$
I \subseteq \union_{i=1}^\infty I_i \implies \abs{I} \leq \sum_{i=1}^\infty \abs{I_i}
.$$

*Proof*:
The proof is by induction. 
Assume $I \subseteq \union_n^{N+1} I_n$, where wlog we can assume that $a < a_{N+1} < b \leq b_{N+1}$, then $[a, a_{N+1}] \subset \union_{n=1}^N I_n$ so the inductive hypothesis applies.

But then
$$
b-a \leq b_{N+1} - a = (b_{N+1} - a_{N+1}) + (a_{N+1} - a) \leq \sum_{n=1}^{N+1} \abs{I_n}
.$$
$\qed$

> Note that this proves that $\RR$ is uncountable!