# Thursday, September 09

:::{.remark}
Last time: 3 geometric avatars of elements $\alpha$ of a Brauer group:

- $\alpha\dash$twisted vector spaces $\Tw_\alpha$
- After projectivizing: Severi-Brauer varieties
- Taking endomorphisms: central simple algebras.

Here we set $G \da \Gal(L\slice k)$ and $\alpha: G\cartpower{2} \to L\units$ representing $[\alpha]\in H^2(G; L\units)$, and defined an $\alpha\dash$twisted vector space as a $V\in \Vect\slice L$ with a semilinear map $f_\sigma: V\to V$ for each $\sigma\in G$ where $\sigma(\ell v) = \sigma(\ell) \sigma(v)$ such that $f_{ \sigma \tau} = f_{ \sigma} \circ f_{ \tau} \alpha(\sigma\tau)$.
Last time we used this to show that 
\[
\im\qty{H^1(k; \PGL_n) \to H^2(k; (k^s)\units ) }
\]
is $n\dash$torsion.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
The category $\Tw_\alpha$ is **semisimple**, i.e. every SES splits, and every object is a direct sum of simple objects.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Note that in vector spaces, $\Hom_k(A, B) \cong B\tensor_k A\dual$, so $\Hom_k(\wait, B) = (\wait)\tensor_k B\dual$ as functors.

Take a SES
\[
0 \to V_2 \to W \to V_1 \to 0 \in \Tw_\alpha
.\]
We want to split this, a good trick to try every time: apply $\Mor_{\Tw_\alpha}(V_1, \cdot)$:
\[
0 \to 
\Mor_{\Tw_\alpha}(V_1, V_2)
\to
\Mor_{\Tw_\alpha}(V_1, W)
\to
\Mor_{\Tw_\alpha}(V_1, V_1)
\to 0
.\]

This sequence is exact since we can write 
\[
\Mor_{\Tw_\alpha}(\wait, V_1) = (\wait)\tensor_k V_1\dual
.\]
It's enough to split this SES, since any splitting $s: \Mor_{\Tw_\alpha}(V_1, V_2) \to \Mor(V_1, W)$ would allow taking $s(\id_{V_1})$ to split the original.
But this sequence does split, since $\Mor_{\Tw_\alpha}(V_1, V_1)$ is free, thus projective.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
Any two simple objects $D_1, D_2\in \Tw_\alpha$ are isomorphic.
:::

:::{.remark}
This is an analog of showing that every vector space is a sum of 1-dimensional sub-vector spaces, i.e. every vector space has a basis.
In this situation, it's essentially Schur's lemma.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
$\Mor_{\Tw_\alpha}(D_1, D_2)\in\Vect\slice L$ is of dimension $d = \dim_L(d_1) \dim_L(d_2) > 0$, so there exists a nonzero map $f:D_1\to D_2$.
The claim is that $f$ is an isomorphism: since both objects are simple, just use that $\ker D_1 \leq D_1$ and $\im f \leq D_2$ are sub-objects.
:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
There exists a unique simple object $D$ of $\Tw_\alpha$, and every other object is of the form $D\sumpower{I}$.
:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
Any CSA is a matrix algebra over a division algebra.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
$\Endo(D\sumpower{n}) = \Mat(n\times n, \Endo(D))$, so it's enough to show $\Endo(D)$ is a division algebra.
This follows by the previous argument, again using Schur's lemma.
:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
For $X\slice k$ a Severi Brauer, $X\cong \PP^n\slice k \iff X(k) \neq \emptyset$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
$\implies$:
Clear, since $\PP^n$ has rational points!

$\impliedby$:
We'll do a variant of the proof that uses $\Tw_\alpha$.
Let $X = \PP(V)$ for $V\in \Tw_{\alpha}$, then any point $x\in X$ yields a 1-dimensional (twisted!) subspace $R \subseteq V$.
Then $[\alpha] = 0 \in H^2(k; (k^s)\units)$, and by Hilbert 90 this comes from a point in the following composition:


\begin{tikzcd}
	{H^1(k; \GL_n)} && {H^1(k; \PGL_n)} && {0\in H^2(k; (k^s)\units)} \\
	{[\alpha]} && {[X]} && 0
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow[maps to, from=2-3, to=2-5]
	\arrow[maps to, from=2-1, to=2-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNixbMCwwLCJIXjEoazsgXFxHTF9uKSJdLFsyLDAsIkheMShrOyBcXFBHTF9uKSJdLFs0LDAsIjBcXGluIEheMihrOyAoa15zKVxcdW5pdHMpIl0sWzAsMSwiW1xcYWxwaGFdIl0sWzIsMSwiW1hdIl0sWzQsMSwiMCJdLFsxLDJdLFswLDFdLFs0LDUsIiIsMCx7InN0eWxlIjp7InRhaWwiOnsibmFtZSI6Im1hcHMgdG8ifX19XSxbMyw0LCIiLDAseyJzdHlsZSI6eyJ0YWlsIjp7Im5hbWUiOiJtYXBzIHRvIn19fV1d)

This forces $X = \PP^n$.
:::

:::{.proof title="$\impliedby$, classical proof"}
Let $X\in \SB$ with $X(k) \neq \emptyset$, then Artin defines $X\dual$, a dual Severi Brauer variety.
This is constructed using that $X_{k^s} = \PP^n$ and sets $X_{k^s}\dual = (\PP^n)\dual$, which comes with descent data to $k$.
A rigorous construction is that if $X = \PP(V)$, we set $X\dual = \PP(V\dual)$.
If $X$ has a $k\dash$point, then $X\dual$ has a rational hyperplane $H$.
The claim is that $X\dual = \PP^n$: this follows from the fact that $\OO(H)$ is a line bundle on $X\dual$ which is isomorphic to $\OO(1)$ on $(\PP^n)\dual$ after base changing to $k^s$.
This follows from cohomology of base change, since
\[
\Globsec{X\dual, \OO(H)\slice {k^s}} = \Globsec{X_{k^s}\dual, \OO(H)\slice{k^s}} = \Globsec{\PP^n\slice Y, \OO(1)}
.\]
So $\OO(H)$ yields a map $X\dual \to \PP^n$ which is an isomorphism after passing to $k^s$.
Now we can write $X = (X\dual)\dual$ and $X\dual = \PP^n$, so 
\[
X = (X\dual )\dual = (\PP^n)\dual \cong \PP^n
.\]
:::

:::{.definition title="Reduced norm and trace"}
Let $A\in \CSA\slice k$, then there are maps
\[
\Norm_{A\slice k}: A &\to k && \text{multiplicative} \\
\Tr_{A\slice k}: A &\to k && \text{additive}
.\]

How they're constructed: let $A\in \Endo(V) = V\tensor V\dual$, then since $\Extpower^*(\wait)$ is a functor, there is a map
\[
\Norm_{A\slice k}: \Endo(V) &\to \Endo\qty{ \Extpower^{\dim V} V} = k \\
\Tr_{A\slice k}: \Endo(V) &\iso V\tensor V\dual \mapsvia{\inner{\wait}{\wait}} k
.\]
:::

:::{.proposition title="?"}
For $A\in \CSA\slice k$, then if there exists a nonzero $f\in A$ with $\Norm_{A\slice k}(f) = 0$, then $A$ is not a division algebra.

> Algebra: nontrivial matrix algebra over a field implies existence of matrices with determinant zero.

:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
The norm is multiplicative, so if $f$ is a unit then $\Norm(f f\inv )= 1\neq 0$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
There is a surjection
\[
\Union_n H^1(k; \PGL_n) \surjects H^2(k; (k^s)\units)
.\]
:::

:::{.proof title="sketch"}
It's enough to show the following surjection:
\[
\Union_n H^1(L\slice k; \PGL_n) \to H^2(L\slice k; L\units)
.\]
Given $\alpha$ in the codomain, interpret it as a central extension:
\[
1 \to L\units \to M_\alpha \to \Gal(L\slice k) \to 1
.\]

:::{.definition title="Semilinear group rings"}
Define $L[M_\alpha]$ to be the **semilinear group ring** of $M_\alpha$:
\[
L[M_\alpha] \bigoplus_{\lambda \in M_\lambda} L[e_\lambda]
\]
where $e_{\lambda_1} e_{ \lambda_2} = e_{ \lambda_1 \lambda_2}$ and $\ell e_{ \lambda} = e_{\lambda} \lambda(\ell)$.
:::

:::{.claim}
$A_\alpha \da L[M_{ \alpha}] / \gens{ \lambda e_1 - 1 e_{ \lambda}}$ is a CSA mapping to $[\alpha]$.
See Serre's *Local Fields*.
:::

:::

:::{.question}
Can this construction be done in $\SB$ or $\Tw_\alpha$?
:::

## Computing Brauer Groups

:::{.remark}
:::

:::{.claim}
$\Br(\FF_q) = 0$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
Let $k$ be a $C_1\dash$field, so any homogeneous polynomial in $k$ with degree $d < n$ has a nonzero solution.
Then $\Br(k) = 0$.
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that [Chevalley–Warning](https://www.wikiwand.com/en/Chevalley%E2%80%93Warning_theorem) exactly says that finite fields are $C_1$.
:::

:::{.proof title="of theorem"}
\envlist

:::{.claim}
Let $A\in \CSA\slice k$, then $\Norm_{A\slice k}: A\to k$ is a polynomial function on $n^2$ variables of degree $n$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
This is true for the actual determinant, and this is a claim that can be checked after passing to $k^s$ since the norm is a *form* of the determinant.
:::

:::{.corollary title="?"}
If $k$ is $C_1$ and $\rank A > 1$, there exists a nonzero $f\in A$ such that $\Norm_{A\slice k}(f) = 0$.
:::

But all $k\dash$division algebras are isomorphic to $k$, here all CSAs are of the form $\Mat(n\times n, k)$, so the Brauer group is trivial.
:::

:::{.theorem title="Tsem"}
If $k = \bar k$ and $C\slice k$ is a smooth proper curve, then the function field $k(C)$ is $C_1$.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Let $f$ be a homogeneous polynomial, $\deg f = d$, in $n$ variables over $k(C)$ with $d < n$.
Then regard $f: k(C)^n \to k(C)$, we want to show $f\inv(0)$ is big.
Let $p\in C$, 
and now $f$ as a map 
\[
f: \Globsec{C; \OO(r\cdot p)^n} \to \Globsec{C; \OO(r d \cdot p)}
,\]
which is a polynomial map of finite dimensional vector spaces that are subspaces of the previous domain/codomain.
Using Riemann-Roch, the dimension of the left-hand side grows like $r\cdot n$ and the right-hand side grows like $r\cdot d$, and for $r$ large enough, $rn > rd$.
Since $f$ is homogeneous, $f\inv(0)$ contains 0, so $\dim f\inv(0)> 0$.
But a positive-dimensional variety over an algebraically closed field has lots of rational points!
:::








