# Tuesday, September 14

:::{.remark}
Goal: Severi-Brauer varieties satisfy the Hasse principle, and develop the Brauer-Manin obstruction.
We have the following theorem: if $X\in \SB\slice k$, then TFAE:

- $X$ has a rational point,
- $X \cong \PP^n$ for some $n$,
- $[X]\in \Br(k)$ is the trivial class.

We'll soon prove the following theorem:
:::

:::{.theorem title="Hasse principle for Severi Brauers"}
For $K$ a number field, there is an injective map
\[
\Br(k) \injects \bigoplus _{v\in \places{k} } \Br(k_v)
,\]
which is a statement of the Hasse principle, since the previous theorem shows that if $\Br(k_v)$ is empty for all $k_v$, it will have to come from a zero class in $\Br(k)$
:::

:::{.remark}
Note that the cokernel of this map is prominent in class field theory!
Today we'll compute $\Br(k_v)$, or more generally $\Br(F)$ for $F$ a local field.
:::

## Cyclic Algebras

:::{.remark}
Setup: take $k\in \Field$, $L\slice k$ a $C_n\dash$Galois extension, which is the data of 
\[
\chi_L: \Gal(k^s\slice k)\to C_n
.\]
For $a\in K^s$, we'll consider pairs $(\chi, a) = L[x]^\chi / \gens{x^n - a}$ where commutation in $L[x]^\chi$ is given by $lx = x\sigma(\ell)$ for $l\in L$ where $C_n = \gens{\sigma}$.
This is a $k\dash$vector space of dimension $n^2$, and the claim is that $(\chi, a) \in \CSA$.
:::

:::{.example title="?"}
Take $\chi: \Gal(\CC\slice \RR) \to C_2$ with $a=-1$, then $(\chi, a) = \HH = \RR[i, j] / \gens{i^2,j^2,[ij]}$ is the (Hamilton) quaternions.
:::

:::{.fact}
One can view $\chi \in H^1_\Gal(k; C_n)$ and 
\[
a\in H^1_\Gal(k; \mu_n) = k\units / (k\units)\powers{2}
.\]
In this case 
\[
(\chi, a) \da \chi \cupprod [a] \in H^2(k; \mu_n) \subseteq H^2(k; (k\sep)\units)
.\]
Note that this cup product can be computed explicitly from the product on $\Ext$ or using the standard resolution.
:::

:::{.remark}
Now to compute more Brauer groups!
So far, we've only done relatively trivial examples.
We'll start with local fields: for algebraically closed fields, Galois cohomology vanishes, so 

- $\Br(\CC) = 0$
- To compute $\Br(\RR) = H^2(\Gal(\CC\slice \RR); \CC\units)$, take the resolution


\begin{tikzcd}
	&& \vdots \\
	{P^\bullet:} && {\ZZ[x]/\gens{x^2-1}} \\
	&& {\ZZ[x]/\gens{x^2-1}} \\
	&& {\ZZ[x]/\gens{x^2-1}} \\
	&& {\ZZ[x]/\gens{x^2-1}} & 1 \\
	&& \ZZ & 1
	\arrow[from=5-3, to=6-3]
	\arrow["{x-1}", from=4-3, to=5-3]
	\arrow[from=5-4, to=6-4]
	\arrow["{x+1}", from=3-3, to=4-3]
	\arrow["{x-1}", from=2-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=2-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=4-3, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsOSxbMiwzLCJcXFpaW3hdL1xcZ2Vuc3t4XjItMX0iXSxbMiw0LCJcXFpaW3hdL1xcZ2Vuc3t4XjItMX0iXSxbMiw1LCJcXFpaIl0sWzMsNCwiMSJdLFszLDUsIjEiXSxbMiwyLCJcXFpaW3hdL1xcZ2Vuc3t4XjItMX0iXSxbMiwxLCJcXFpaW3hdL1xcZ2Vuc3t4XjItMX0iXSxbMCwxLCJQXlxcYnVsbGV0OiJdLFsyLDAsIlxcdmRvdHMiXSxbMSwyXSxbMCwxLCJ4LTEiXSxbMyw0XSxbNSwwLCJ4KzEiXSxbNiw1LCJ4LTEiXSxbNiw1XSxbMCw1XV0=)

Then we can take $H^*(\Hom_{\mods{\Gal}}(P^\bullet, \CC\units ))$:

\begin{tikzcd}
	&& 1 && {z\bar{z}} \\
	\CC\units && \CC\units && \CC\units && \CC\units \\
	z && {\bar{z}z\inv} && z && {\bar{z}z\inv}
	\arrow[from=2-1, to=2-3]
	\arrow[from=2-3, to=2-5]
	\arrow[from=2-5, to=2-7]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=3-5, to=3-7]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsMTAsWzAsMSwiXFxDQ1xcdW5pdHMiXSxbMiwxLCJcXENDXFx1bml0cyJdLFswLDIsInoiXSxbMiwyLCJcXGJhcnt6fXpcXGludiJdLFs0LDEsIlxcQ0NcXHVuaXRzIl0sWzQsMiwieiJdLFs2LDIsIlxcYmFye3p9elxcaW52Il0sWzYsMSwiXFxDQ1xcdW5pdHMiXSxbMiwwLCIxIl0sWzQsMCwielxcYmFye3p9Il0sWzAsMV0sWzEsNF0sWzQsN10sWzIsM10sWzUsNl0sWzgsOV1d)

Check that $\bar z z\inv = 1$ then $z = \bar z$ so $z\in \RR\units$ and $\ker d = \RR\units$.
Similarly, $\im d = \RR\units_{>0}$, so
\[
\Br(\RR) = \RR\units/ \RR\units_{>0} = \ts{\pm 1}
.\]

:::

:::{.example title="?"}
$\HH$ represents $-1$ in $\Br(\RR)$, as does the corresponding Severi Brauer 
\[
\ts{x^2 + y^2 + z^2 = 0} \subseteq \PP^2\slice \RR
.\]
Note that $+1$ is represented by the field itself, regarded as a $1\times 1$ matrix algebra, or projective space.
:::

:::{.remark}
Write $k^\unram$ for the maximal unramified extensions, where an extension is *ramified* if the degree of the residue field changes (or the valuation remains an integer?)
For example, for $k = \QQpadic$, we have $k^\unram = \ff(W(\bar{\FF_p}))$ (i.e. the Witt vectors).
In general, $k^\unram = k(\mu_\infty')$ where $\mu_\infty'$ is the set of roots of unity of order prime to the characteristic.
As a corollary, $\Gal(k^\unram\slice k) = \bar{\FF_q}/\FF_1 = \hat \ZZ$.
:::

:::{.theorem title="?"}
For $k$ a nonarchimedean local field (a finite extension of $\QQpadic$), then $\Br(k) = \QQ/\ZZ$

- $H^2(k^{\unram}\slice k; (k^\unram)\units) = \QQ/\ZZ$
- $H^2(k^\unram\slice k, (k^\unram)\units) \iso H^2(k; (k^s)\units) = \Br(k)$ is an isomorphism.

:::

:::{.remark}
Many proofs of this are delicate!
We'll follow a mix of Cassels-Frolich and Milne for this proof.
:::

:::{.proof title="of 1"}
Take the SES coming from the valuation map:

\begin{tikzcd}
	1 && {U_{k^\unram}} && {(k^\unram)\units} && \ZZ && 0
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow["\val", from=1-5, to=1-7]
	\arrow[from=1-7, to=1-9]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNSxbMCwwLCIxIl0sWzIsMCwiVV97a15cXHVucmFtfSJdLFs0LDAsIihrXlxcdW5yYW0pXFx1bml0cyJdLFs2LDAsIlxcWloiXSxbOCwwLCIwIl0sWzAsMV0sWzEsMl0sWzIsMywiXFx2YWwiXSxbMyw0XV0=)


:::{.claim}
\envlist

- $H^2(k^\unram\slice k; \ZZ) = \QQ/\ZZ$.
- $H^*(k^\unram\slice k; U_{k^\unram}) = 0$

:::

:::{.remark}
Why this implies the theorem: take the LES in cohomology to get the following:

\begin{tikzcd}
	\textcolor{rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}{H^2(k^\unram \slice k; U_{k^\unram})=0} && {H^2(k^\unram \slice k; (k^\unram)\units )} && {H^2(k^\unram \slice k; \ZZ)} \\
	\\
	\textcolor{rgb,255:red,214;green,92;blue,92}{H^3(k^\unram \slice k; U_{k^\unram}) = 0}
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-5]
	\arrow[from=1-5, to=3-1]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJIXjIoa15cXHVucmFtIFxcc2xpY2UgazsgVV97a15cXHVucmFtfSk9MCIsWzAsNjAsNjAsMV1dLFswLDIsIkheMyhrXlxcdW5yYW0gXFxzbGljZSBrOyBVX3trXlxcdW5yYW19KSA9IDAiLFswLDYwLDYwLDFdXSxbMiwwLCJIXjIoa15cXHVucmFtIFxcc2xpY2UgazsgKGteXFx1bnJhbSlcXHVuaXRzICkiXSxbNCwwLCJIXjIoa15cXHVucmFtIFxcc2xpY2UgazsgXFxaWikiXSxbMCwyXSxbMiwzXSxbMywxXV0=)

A claim is that $H^2(k^\unram \slice k; \ZZ) = H^2(\hat \ZZ; \ZZ)$.
One can compute this colimit explicitly, but there is a SES
\[
0\to \ZZ \to \QQ\to \QQ/\ZZ\to 0
.\]

Now note that $H^{>0}(G; \QQ) = 0$ for profinite groups, since this is necessarily a torsion $\QQ\dash$vector space.
For a full proof, use that multiplication by $n$ is an isomorphism the annihilates it.
As a corollary, taking the LES above yields $H^{i}(G; \ZZ) = H^{i-1}(G; \QQ/Z)$ for $i\geq 2$.
Thus 
\[
H^2(\hat \ZZ; \ZZ) = H^1(\hat \ZZ; \QQ/\ZZ) = \Hom_{\Top}(\hat \ZZ, \QQ/\ZZ) = \QQ/\ZZ
,\]
and in fact
\[
H^1(\hat \ZZ; \QQ/\ZZ) = \colim_n \Hom(C_n; \QQ/\ZZ)
.\]
:::

:::

:::{.proof title="of b"}
Here we'll have to use the structure of $U_{k^\unram}$.
It's enough to show 
\[
H^{>0}(k_n{} \slice k; U_{k_n}) = 0
\]
for $k_n{}\slice k$ unramified of finite degree $n$, using that these are unique.
We'll use the following:


:::{.definition title="?"}
There is a filtration $\Fil_r U_{k_n} = \ts{u\in U_{k_n} \st u = 1 \mod \pi^r}$ for $\pi$ a uniformizer.
:::


:::{.fact}
We can identify
\[
\Fil_r/\Fil_{r+1} 
=
\begin{cases}
\kappa_n\units & r=0 
\\
\kappa_n^+ & r>0.
\end{cases}
,\]
where $\kappa$ denotes residue fields, $\kappa_n{}\slice \kappa$ is the unique degree $n$ extension, and $\kappa^+$ is the additive group.
Why: use that these look like power series, and the associated graded picks off the $r$th coefficient.
Moreover, things like $1+\pi^2$ can be units by formally inverting using geometric series.
:::

Thus it's enough to show for residue fields that
\[
H^{>0}(\kappa_n{}\slice \kappa; \kappa_n\units) &= 0 \\
H^{>0}(\kappa_n{}\slice \kappa; \kappa_n^+) &= 0
,\]
since each graded piece of the associated grading having zero cohomology implies the entire thing has zero cohomology.

For the first,

- $i=1$ is Hilbert 90,
- $i=2$ follows from $\Br(\kappa_n{} \slice \kappa) = 0$,
- $i\geq 3$ uses that $H^* = H^*[-2]$, since the resolution used for cohomology of a cyclic group was 2-periodic.


For the second, to compute the cohomology of a cyclic group we take the 2-periodic resolution:

\begin{tikzcd}
	x && {x^{q}-x} \\
	{k_n} && {k_n} && {k_n} && \cdots \\
	&& x && {\sum x^{q^i}}
	\arrow[from=2-1, to=2-3]
	\arrow[from=2-3, to=2-5]
	\arrow["{\Frob - 1}", from=1-1, to=1-3]
	\arrow["\trace_ { {\kappa_n} {}\slice{\kappa} }", from=3-3, to=3-5]
	\arrow[from=2-5, to=2-7]
\end{tikzcd}

> [Link to Diagram](https://q.uiver.app/?q=WzAsOCxbMCwxLCJrX24iXSxbMCwwLCJ4Il0sWzIsMCwieF57cX0teCJdLFsyLDEsImtfbiJdLFs0LDEsImtfbiJdLFsyLDIsIngiXSxbNCwyLCJcXHN1bSB4XntxXml9Il0sWzYsMSwiXFxjZG90cyJdLFswLDNdLFszLDRdLFsxLDIsIlxcRnJvYiAtIDEiXSxbNSw2LCJcXHRleHR7XCJBZGRpdGl2ZSBub3JtXCJ9IiwyXSxbNCw3XV0=)

Then

- $H^2 = \ker/\im$, and $\ker = k$ since Frobenius fixes everything, and use that 
\[
\sum x^{q^i} = x + x^q + x^{q^2} + \cdots = \trace_{\kappa_n {}\slice \kappa}(x)
.\]
  
- If $n$ is invertible, so $p\notdivides n$, writing $\Tr(1) = n$ we can take $\Tr(a/n) = a$.
  
- It suffices to show this polynomial isn't identically zero, but it's a polynomial of degree $q^{n-1}$ but $\# \kappa_n = q^n$.

- Now use that $a = \trace(x)$ for some $a\nonzero$, then take $b = \trace(bx/a)$.

:::

