# Diophantine Equations (Lec. 1, Thursday, January 14)

## Intro/Logistics

See website for notes on books, intro to class.

- Youtube Playlist: <https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLA0xtXqOUji8fjQysx4k8a6h-hOZ7x5ue>

- Free copies of textbook: <https://www.dropbox.com/sh/rv5j222kn74bjhm/AABZ1qcR1rOnpaBsa5CL3P_Ea?dl=0&lst=>

Paul's description of the course:

> This course is an introduction to arithmetic beyond $\ZZ$, specifically arithmetic in the ring of integers in a finite extension of $\QQ$. 
> Among many other things, we’ll prove three important theorems about these rings: 
>
> - Unique factorization into ideals. 
> - Finiteness of the group of ideal classes. 
> - Dirichlet’s theorem on the structure of the unit group.

## Motivation

:::{.remark}
The main motivation: solving **Diophantine equations**, i.e. polynomial equations over $\ZZ$.
:::

:::{.example title="of a Diophantine equation"}
Consider $y^2 = x^3 + x$.

:::{.claim}
$(x, y) = (0, 0)$ is the only solution.
:::

To see this, write $y^2 = x(x^2+1)$, which are relatively prime, i.e. no $D\in \ZZ$ divides both of them.
Why?
If $d \divides x$ and $d \divides x+1$, then $d\divides (x^2+1) + (-x) = 1$.
It's also the case that both $x^2+1$ and $x^2$ are squares (up to a unit), so $x^2, x^2 + 1$ are consecutive squares in $\ZZ$.
But the gaps between squares are increasing: $1, 2, 4, 9, \cdots$.
The only possibilities would be $x=0, y=1$, but in this case you can conclude $y=0$. 

:::

:::{.example title="Fermat"}
Consider $y^2 = x^3-2$.


:::{.claim}
$(3, \pm 5)$ are the only solutions.
:::

Rewrite 
\[
x^3 = y^2+2 &= (y+ \sqrt{-2})(y - \sqrt{-2}) \\ 
&\in
\ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \da \ts{a+b\sqrt{-2} \st a,b,\in \ZZ} \leq \CC
.\] 
This is a subring of $\CC$, and thus at least an integral domain.
We want to try the same argument: showing the two factors are relatively prime.
A little theory will help here:

:::{.definition title="Norm Map"}
\[
N \alpha \da \alpha\bar \alpha && \text{for } \alpha\in \ZZ[ \sqrt{-2} ]
.\]
:::

:::{.lemma title="?"}
Let \( \alpha, \beta \in \ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \).
Then 

1. \( N(\alpha \beta) = N(\alpha) N(\beta) \)
2. $N( \alpha) \in \ZZ_{\geq 0}$ and $N(\alpha) = 0$ if and only if \( \alpha= 0 \).

3. \( N(\alpha) = 1 \iff \alpha\in R\units \) 
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}

1. Missing, see video (10:13 AM).

2. \( N(\alpha) = a^2 + 2b^2 \geq 0 \), so this equals zero if and only if \( \alpha= \beta= 0 \)  

3. Write \( 1 = \alpha\bar \alpha \) if \( N(\alpha) = 1 \in R\units\).
Conversely if \( \alpha\in R\units \) write \( \alpha \beta = 1 \), then 
\[ 
1 = N(1) = N(\alpha \beta) = N(\alpha ) N(\beta ) \in \ZZ_{\geq 0} 
,\] 
which forces both to be 1.
:::

:::{.claim}
The two factors \( y \pm \sqrt 2 \) are *coprime* in \( \ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \), i.e. every common divisor is a unit.
:::

:::{.proof title="?"}
Suppose \( \delta\divides y\pm \sqrt{-2} \), then \( y + \sqrt{-2} = \delta \beta \) for some \( \beta\in \ZZ[\sqrt{-2}] \).
Take norms to obtain 
\( y^2 + 2 = N \delta N \beta \), and in particular 

- \( N \delta y^2 +2 \) 
- \( \delta \divides (y+ \sqrt{-2} ) - (y - \sqrt{-2} ) = 2 \sqrt{-2} \) and thus \( N \delta \divides N(2 \sqrt{-2} ) = 8 \).

In the original equation \( y^2 = x^3-2 \), if $y$ is even then $x$ is even, and $x^3 - 2 \equiv 0-2 \mod 4 \equiv 2$, and so $y^2 \equiv 2 \mod 4$.
But this can't happen, so $y$ is odd, and we're done: we have \( N \delta\divides 8 \) which is even or 1, but \( N \delta\divides y^2 +2 \) which is odd, so \( N \delta = 1 \).

:::

We can identify the units in this ring:
\[
\ZZ[\sqrt{-2} ]\units = \ts{ a + b \sqrt{-2} \st a^2 + 2b^2 = 1}
\]
which forces $a^2 \leq 1, b^2 \leq 1$ and thus this set is $\ts{\pm 1}$.
So we have \( x^3 = ab \) which are relatively primes, so $a,b$ should also be cubes.
We don't have to worry about units here, since $\pm 1$ are both cubes.
So e.g. we can write 
\[
y + \sqrt{-2} = (a + b \sqrt{-2} )^3 = (a^3-6ab^2) + (3a^2b -2b^3) \sqrt{-2}
.\]
Comparing coefficients of 
\( \sqrt{-2} \)  yields 
\[ 1 = b(3a^2b - 2b^2) \in \ZZ \implies b \divides 1
,\] and thus $b\in \ZZ\units$, i.e. $b\in \ts{\pm 1}$.
By cases:

- If $b=1$, then $1 = 3a^2 -2 \implies a^2 = 1 \implies a = \pm 1$.
  So 
\[
y = \sqrt{-2} = (\pm 1 + \sqrt{-2} )^3 = \pm 5 + \sqrt{-2}
,\] 
  which forces $y=\pm 5$, the solution we already knew.

- If $b = -1$, then \( 1 = -(3a^2 - 1) \) which forces $1=3a^2 \in \ZZ$, so there are no solutions.

:::

## Failure of Unique Factorization

:::{.example title="where unique factorization fails"}
Consider $y^2 = x^3 - 26$.
Rewrite this as \[
x^3 = y^2 + 26 = (y + \sqrt{-26} )(y - \sqrt{-26} )
,\] 
then the same lemma goes through with $2$ replaced by $26$ everywhere where the RHS factors are still coprime.
Setting $y + \sqrt{-26} = (a + b \sqrt{-26} )^3$ and comparing coefficients, you'll find $b=1, a = \pm 3$.
This yields $x=35, y=\pm 207$.
But there are more solutions: $(x, y) = (3, \pm 1)$!
The issue is that we used unique factorization when showing that $ab$ is a square implies $a$ or $b$ is a square (say by checking prime factorizations and seeing even exponents).
In this ring, we can have $ab$ a cube with *neither* $a,b$ a cube, even up to a unit.
:::

:::{.question}
When does a ring admit unique factorization?
Do you even *need* it?
:::

:::{.remark}
This will lead to a discussion of things like the **class number**, which measure the failure of unique factorization.
In general, the above type of proof will work when the class number is 3!
:::
